Mapeo Mobile

Install

To install Mapeo Mobile on your Android device,download the latest
version on Google Play​. ​You can also download the app as an APKand
install it manually on your phone. ​For more on installation, see
installing-mapeo-mobile.md.

Collect data

You collect data with Mapeo Mobile in the form of observations. An
observation is based on a geographic location (a point on the map) and
can have associated photos, notes and details.

To create a new observation, tap the Create observation button, then
select a category.

Add a description, photos and details, then tap the Save button.

View observations

Each observation will be marked on the map with a dot. Observations can
also be viewed in list form by tapping the Observations list button.

Tap on an observation from the map or list to view its details.

Edit an observation

With the details of an observation open, tap the Edit button to make
changes.

Share data externally

Tap on the Share observation button to send the details of a single
observation to a contact outside of Mapeo using one of the
communications apps installed on your phone (WhatsApp, Signal, Email,
etc.).

Delete an observation

Tap the Delete button to delete an observation and its associated media.

{% hint style=“warning” %} Deleting observations cannot be undone, so
exercise caution when using delete. {% endhint %}

Synchronize data

Mapeo Mobile allows you to synchronize data with other Mapeo users that
are participants of the same project. During synchronization, ALL data
from one device will be sent to the other device and vice versa. For
more on synchronization, see: peer-to-peer-and-mapeo-sync.md.

To synchronize data between 2 Mapeo Mobile devices that are near each
other:

1.  Connect both devices to the same Wi-Fi network. (You do not need to
    have an internet connection.)

2.  Tap the Synchronize button on both devices.

3.  On the Synchronize screen, identify the device you wish to
    synchronize with in the list and tap the Sync button beside its
    name.

4.  Keep the Synchronize screen open on both devices until the
    synchronization has completed.

-   

{% hint style=“info” %} For detailed instructions on how to use all
features of Mapeo Mobile, see below sections in the Complete Reference
Guide:

mapeo-mobile-installation-setup

mapeo-mobile-use {% endhint %} # Mapeo Desktop

Install

Download Mapeo Desktop from the Mapeo website and double click the file
to launch the installer. For more on installation, see
installing-mapeo-desktop.md.

Mapeo Desktop for managing Mapeo Mobile data (Observations mode)

Observations mode in Mapeo Desktop is designed for viewing, managing and
exporting data collected with Mapeo Mobile. The steps below will cover
the basics for testing Observations mode.

{% hint style=“info” %} For more detailed instructions and information
on how to use Mapeo Desktop for creating territory data (Territory
mode), see the Complete Reference Guide section on mapeo-desktop-use. {%
endhint %}

Synchronize Mapeo Mobile data

To get started, synchronize collected data from a Mapeo Mobile device.
To synchronize via Wi-Fi, as detailed below, the Mapeo Mobile and Mapeo
Desktop devices must be near each other.

Connect to Wi-Fi

Make sure both the Mapeo Mobile device and the Mapeo Desktop device are
connected to the same Wi-Fi network. (An internet connection is not
required.)

Enter Synchronize mode

In Mapeo Mobile, tap the Synchronize button to enter the Synchronize
screen.

In Mapeo Desktop, click on Synchronize in the Mapeo modes panel.

Start synchronization

On the Mapeo Desktop Synchronize screen, identify the mobile device you
would like to synchronize with and click on the Synchronize button below
its name.

{% hint style=“warning” %} IMPORTANT: Keep the Synchronize screen open
on BOTH devices until the synchronization is complete. Interrupting the
sync process can result in permanently corrupted data. {% endhint %}

{% hint style=“info” %} In order to synchronize, Mapeo devices must be
connected to the same Wi-Fi network, and using the same project
configuration.

For more detailed instructions on synchronizing in Mapeo Desktop, see
syncing-data.md. {% endhint %}

View observations

To view synchronized data, click on Observations in the Mapeo modes
panel.

Map view

By default, observations are displayed as dots on a map. Click on an
individual dot to view the details of that observation.

Media view

To view observations as a gallery of images, click on Media in the
Toolbar above the map. Click on an individual image to view the details
of that observation.

Report view

To view observations in the form of a report, click on Report in the
Toolbar.

Filter observations

To look at a subset of your observations in Map, Media or Report view,
use the Filter panel to select a specific data range, a subset of
categories, or specific data values from details fields.

Edit observations

From Map or Media view, click on a dot or image to view the full details
of the corresponding observation. From Report view, use the EDIT button
in the grey toolbar to open the details of the observation shown in the
current page of the report.

With the observation details open, click on a field to add or edit
information. Click SAVE to save changes.

{% hint style=“info” %} In Mapeo Desktop you cannot modify the creation
date, category type or geographic location of an observation. {% endhint
%}

Delete observations

To delete an observation, open the observation details and click on
theMore options menu. Select Delete observation and confirm deletion in
the pop-up window.

{% hint style=“warning” %} Deleting observations cannot be undone, so
exercise caution when using delete.

By deleting observations, you will permanently remove them from your
device and all devices you synchronize data with in the future. For more
on synchronization, see peer-to-peer-and-mapeo-sync.md {% endhint %}

Export data

Data can be exported to multiple formats from Observations mode in Mapeo
Desktop. Basic export instructions are included below.

-   Save as PDF Report
-   Export to GeoJSON, CSV, or SMART CSV
-   Export as Web Map (In Complete Reference Guide)

{% hint style=“info” %} For more details on Mapeo export formats and
process, see exporting-and-sharing-externally.md in the Complete
Reference Guide. {% endhint %}

Save as PDF Report

To save a PDF report with the observations collected, go to Report view.
Filter observations if desired using the Filter panel. Hide any fields
you don’t wish to appear by using the Hide fields option in the grey
panel above the report.
To save, click on Save PDF.

Export to GeoJSON, CSV, or SMART CSV

To export observations to GeoJSON, CSV or SMART CSV format, click on the
Export options menu at the top right corner of the Mapeo Desktop window.

Select Export Observations… then select the desired data format and
options in the Export Observations pop-up window. Click SAVE to name the
export file and choose the location on your computer where it will be
saved.

{% hint style=“info” %} For detailed instructions on all features and
uses of Mapeo Desktop, see mapeo-desktop-use in the Complete Reference
Guide. {% endhint %} # Getting started

The Quick Start Guide is intended to help you install and test the
basic, out-of-the-box functionality of Mapeo in order to evaluate
whether it will be a good fit. This section will not touch on all
features or customization of the tools.

The Complete Reference Guide below includes critical information about
how to design and implement a project using Mapeo as well as detailed
guides for setup and customization of the tools. We recommend using it
for starting a new initiative or as a training reference. # Translating
Mapeo & default configurations

Mapeo aims to be accessible to a wide range of communities in their
native languages, and to facilitate the process of translating the app
and the default configuration into new languages as needed.

While developing custom configurations currently requires significant
technical knowledge, the process of translating Mapeo and the default
configuration into a new local language can be an easier way to
customize the tool for use in your project.

Translation using Crowdin

Translations for Mapeo are handled through the Crowdin platform. It is
free to create an account on Crowdin and anyone can contribute
translations to Mapeo for new or existing languages.

To begin translating, visit the project page for the area you would like
to translate.

-   Mapeo Mobile
    Text and titles for screens and buttons in the mobile app
-   Mapeo Desktop
    Text and titles for screens and buttons in the dekstop app
-   Mapeo’s default configuration
    Names of data collection categories, and details fields

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
                 Project page for Mapeo Mobile on Crowdin

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Project page for Mapeo Mobile on Crowdin

Viewing available languages

On the project home page you can view all languages currently available
for the project and how complete translations are.

Adding a new language

If the language you wish to translate is not available on the project
home page, contact the Project Owner (listed on the bottom right of the
page) to request an addition to the list.

Contributing translations

To start translating, create an account with Crowdin, visit the relevant
project home page, and select the target language. Click on Translate
All to bring up all relevant text strings. # Custom configurations

About custom configurations

Custom configurations are a powerful tool for customization in Mapeo,
allowing users to define specific categories, icons, and questionnaires
for their projects. Custom category and questionnaire text can be
written in any language that can be typed, ensuring that key parts of
the Mapeo data collection interface can appear in the native language of
the groups using it.

In the current version of Mapeo, configurations also contain a project
key that allows participants of the same Mapeo project to synchronize
data with each other and prevents synchronization with other devices. ​

Creating custom configurations

If you have determined that Mapeo’s default-configuration.md will not
suit the needs of your project, you have the option of authoring a
custom configuration.

{% hint style=“warning” %} Creating custom configurations currently
requires significant technical knowledge and will not be accessible to
all users. {% endhint %}

The customization process, detailed in creating-custom-configurations,
requires comfort editing JSON files, generating SVG image files, and
using GitHub Actions or installing and using node packages via the
command line. # Creating custom configurations

{% hint style=“warning” %} Please note that creating custom
configurations currently requires significant technical knowledge and
will not be accessible to all users. {% endhint %}

Overview of the process

There are several steps to creating a custom configuration that will
require different skills and the involvement of different actors within
a project. You should leave plenty of time prior to the intended start
of data collection to allow for community consultation, testing, and
iterations of your configuration.

While data structures in Mapeo can be modified during the course of a
project, many changes over time can result in messy data outputs. It is
worthwhile to test and refine your configuration to the extent possible
before putting it into use for data collection.

Once you have completed this process, you will have a Mapeo
configuration file (.mapeosettings) that can be imported and used in
Mapeo Mobile and Destop.

The pages that follow will walk you through the key steps for authoring
a custom configuration:

-   planning-configuration-and-data-structure
    This section will outline the key customizable elements in a
    configuration and some considerations when mapping out each area.
    *No technical knowledge is required.

-   coding-configuration
    This section will guide you through translating the planned data
    structure into the required format and compiling the Mapeo
    configuration file.
    *Editing JSON files, generating .svg files and working with command
    line or GitHub is required.

{% hint style=“info” %} For instructions on how to import a
configuration file (.mapeosettings) into Mapeo, see:

importing-configurations.md

importing-configurations.md {% endhint %} # Testing and iterating

Once you’ve compiled your custom configuration, you will have a
.mapeosettings file that can be imported into Mapeo Mobile and Desktop
for testing and use.

What is a .mapeosettings file? 

A .mapeosettings file is a tar file, similar to a zip file. For
debugging purposes you can see the contents of the file by changing the
file extension to .tar and using any application that can extract tar
files.

Importing a configuration into Mapeo

For instructions on how to import a configuration file (.mapeosettings)
into Mapeo, see:

importing-configurations.md

importing-configurations.md

Testing out your configuration

It’s worthwhile to thoroughly kick the tires of your new configuration
prior to introducing it into your project and beginning formal data
collection.

A few things to look for when testing configurations:

-   Icons
    ****Do icons render clearly? **** Check how icons appear, especially
    in Mapeo Mobile on devices with smaller screens.
-   Categories
    ****Do categories appear in a logical order on the Categories screen
    of Mapeo Mobile? **** Changes can be made via the sort property in
    creating-categories.md.
-   Details fields
    ****Are text labels and placeholders easy to understand? Do details
    fields appear in a logical order? Fields will be displayed to users
    in the order they are listed in the fields array in
    creating-categories.md.
-   Colors
    If you added color to category map markers, are they distinguishable
    from one another and visible on your map background?
-   Name and version
    Does the name and version of your configuration appear as desired on
    the Project configuration screen of Mapeo Mobile or the Synchronize
    screen of Mapeo Desktop?

Making changes

Changes can easily be made to your configuration via steps in the
coding-configurationsection. We often test, modify, recompile and retest
several times before releasing a new config version.

As noted in planning-configuration-and-data-structure, configurations
can and often will evolve over time. As you begin collecting data, you
will likely find categories, details fields and options you would like
to add or modify.

Unlike some other survey or data collection tools, Mapeo allows a lot of
flexibility for changing configurations over time and does not require
that the database be wiped when changes are made. While changes to icons
or color, name, label, or placeholder fields will be minor, more
significant modifications like removing a category will impact how
existing data is displayed in Mapeo and data exports. Regardless of
these changes, no previous data will be lost or unviewable. # Creating
details fields

{% hint style=“info” %} To review key information on defining details
fields, see details-fields.md. {% endhint %}

In fields directory customize the .json files

Each .json file in the fields directory needs a key, type, label, and
placeholder.

type can be one of select_multiple, select_one, or text.

For select_one and select_multiple fields, you will need to define an
array of answer options.

Example fields file (name.json):

    {
        "key": "name",
        "type": "text",
        "label": "Name",
        "placeholder": "Common name of this place"
    }

Example fields file (sample-type.json):

    {
        "key": "sample-type",
        "type": "select_one",
        "label": "Sample type",
        "placeholder": "Select the type of testing",
        "options": [
            "Meteorological",
            "Air",
            "Soil",
            "Water",
            "Mineral",
            "Forestry/vegetation",
            "Other"
        ]
    }

Adding a project key

What is a Project Key?

In the metadata.json file in your Mapeo configuration, you can include a
projectKey, which is a random cryptographic string of characters to
prevent unwanted devices from getting access to the data.

Once a Mapeo Mobile or Mapeo Desktop device has imported a configuration
with a project key, it can only sync with another Mapeo Mobile or Mapeo
Desktop device that has the same project key.

You can edit the project key (for example, if you want to make first 4
characters identifiable to a project) but it can only contain letters
a-f and numbers 0-9.

It can also only be 64 characters long – no more, no less.

Creating a Project Key

To create a projectKey, first open the Terminal.

Using mapeo-settings-builder

{% hint style=“info” %} For instructions on how to install
mapeo-settings-builder, see Building configuration file
preparing-computer.md. {% endhint %}

Copy and paste the following command into the terminal

    mapeo-settings-builder generate-key

You’ll see something like this (but with x replaced with real characters
and numbers)

    '380c02d32xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx1d'

Copy this string and add it to the metadata.json file so it looks like
this:

    {
      "dataset_id": "mapeo-jungle",
      "projectKey": "380c02d32xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx1d"
    }

Notice that there are double quotes " around each value. # Coding
configuration

Mapeo configuration files (.mapeosettings) are compiled from a set of
files and folders that contain all the information Mapeo needs to
display the categories, icons and details fields you want users to see
when collecting and viewing data. This section will walk you through
translating all of the information you’ve defined in
planning-configuration-and-data-structure into a Mapeo configuration
file.

Configuration folder structure

To begin preparing your files, you can download or clone our ****
default configuration repository or this empty configuration repository
from GitHub. These repositories contain the core files and folders you
will need for editing.

When authoring custom configurations, you will edit files within the
following configuration folders:

-   icons
-   fields
-   presets (categories)

And the following configuration files:

-   metadata.json
-   defaults.json
-   package.json

Prepare folder structure

Using the file explorer

1.  Download the default configuration repository or empty configuration
    repository.
2.  Unzip the contents to a new folder using a program like 7zip.
3.  Rename the folder from “mapeo-default-settings” to use your own
    project name, “mapeo-config-projectname”.

Using the terminal (linux and mac)

    wget https://github.com/digidem/mapeo-default-settings/archive/v2.1.0.zip 
    unzip v2.1.0.zip 
    mv mapeo-default-settings-v2.1.0 mapeo-settings-myprojectname

Creating and exporting SVG files using Inkscape

Inkscape is a free and open-source vector graphics editor used to create
vector images, primarily in Scalable Vector Graphics (.svg) format.
Inkscape is an alternative to the commercial software Adobe Illustrator,
and can be used to generate .svg files that work in Mapeo.

Using Inkscape to vectorize images

A common workflow for generating Mapeo icons is to find photos or other
raster images, and turn them into vector images, simplifying them until
they will render well at a small size. In Adobe Illustrator, this can be
done using the Image Trace tool.

In Inkscape, this can be done using the Trace Bitmap tool found in the
Path menu. There are some options to manipulate like Smoothing corners,
Optimizing corners, and setting the number of colors.

Saving .svg files with the right size and Viewbox in Document Properties

Once you have a vector image that is to your satisfaction (and in a
square format), you need to set the correct width & height and Viewbox
size before saving the .svg file. You can do this in Document Properties
(File menu).

First, set the Display units to pixels (px). This dropdown is located at
the very top of the Document Properties menu.

Locate the “Custom Size” and “Scale” boxes in Document Properties.

First, you may need to set the unit of measurement for the Custom size,
if it is not in pixels. If Units is in a format like milimeters (mm),
change this to px.

Set the Width and Height to 100 each.

Next, the Viewbox needs to be set to 100 as well. The easiest way to do
this — once you’ve set the Display units and Custom size units to pixels
— is to set the Scale x to 1. It should copy over the Width and Height
values from the Custom Size to the Viewbox. If that didn’t do the trick,
manually enter 100 for both Width and Height here.

Once you’ve done this, you may need to resize the art to match the full
size of the Viewbox:

The easiest way to do this is to use the sizing and placement parameters
right above the Viewbox, as shown in the screenshot above. Set W and H
to 100 (px), and make sure X and Y are set to 0 (px). The image will
then fill the entire Viewbox:

You can now save the .svg file by going to File → Save / Save As / Save
A Copy.

Your .svg file should now be ready to be used by Mapeo. See
#naming-icon-files for more information on how to name the files and
where to place them in the configuration directory.

Verify that your SVG file is built correctly

{% hint style=“info” %} If you want to verify that the parameters in
your .svg file are correct, open it in a text editor like Visual Studio
Code or Notepad++. {% endhint %}

It should have an initial <svg> tag with width and height set to 100,
and viewBox set to “0 0 100 100.”

After some tags like <defs>, <sodipodi:namedview>, <metadata>, which
don’t matter for the purposes of creating icons for Mapeo, you should
see tags like <g> with layer properties, and a series of <path> with
vertices and style properties, which constitute your vectors.

If your .svg file looks like this, the Mapeo configurations builder
script should process your icons just fine.

Additional resources

-   Troubleshooting SVG image errors in Mapbox Studio # Adding icon
    files

{% hint style=“info” %} To review key information on designing icons,
see icons.md. {% endhint %}

Once you’ve settled on the design or concept for your icons, you’ll need
to generate .svg files for each one to be saved in the icons directory.
Icons should be created as 100x100 pixel graphics that are clear when
viewing at 100%.

To generate .svg icons for Mapeo, there is an online Mapeo Icons
Generator tool accessible here.

We have also documented two workflows to generate Mapeo-compatible .svg
files using software, one using a commercial product (Adobe Illustrator)
and another using a open-source product (Inkscape).

-   creating-and-exporting-svg-files-using-adobe-illustrator.md
-   creating-and-exporting-svg-files-using-inkscape.md

Naming icon files

Icons need to be read by MAPEO in two sizes: 100 pixels and 24 pixels.
For that reason there is a specific file naming convention:

-   icon-name-100px.svg
-   icon-name-24px.svg

Each icon can be duplicated and renamed so that there is one of each
size. They are opened and read by the .json files in the presets folder.
Verify that name is correctly entered where needed (more on this in the
next section). The build script will process the pixel size suffix.

Additional resources

-   Troubleshooting SVG image errors in Mapbox Studio # Creating and
    exporting SVG files using Adobe Illustrator

Adobe Illustrator is a vector graphics editor and design program
developed by Adobe Inc. Although it is a commercial, licensed product,
it is very commonly used to put together vector graphics, and many users
utilize this tool for creating icons for Mapeo as well.

 Exporting .svg files with the right properties

When you’re ready to export a vector graphic file into a
Mapeo-compatible .svg file format, the process is as follows:

-   On the Adobe Illustrator top menu, click on File and then select
    Export, followed by Export As.
-   Ensure that Use Artboards is checked.

-   Save your .svg file in the correct directory (icons for Mapeo
    configurations) and with your desired filename, and click Export.
-   In the following window, ensure that the following properties are
    set, and then click OK:

Your .svg file should now be ready to be used by Mapeo. See
#naming-icon-files for more information on how to name the files and
where to place them in the configuration directory. # Defining geometry
defaults

The defaults.json file is currently used by Mapeo Desktop to determine
which categories (presets) to list for each type of map geometry (point,
line, area).

Before building your configuration, ensure that defaults.json includes
an array of presets for each geometry that corresponds to the geometries
you’ve listed in your preset files.

Example defaults.json file:

    {
        "area": [
            "area", 
            "airstrip",
            "animal",
            "community",
            "fishing-site",
            "gathering-site",
            "hills",
            "hunting-site",
            "lake",
            "palm",
            "special-site",
            "swidden",
            "threat",
            "tree",
            "plant"
        ],
        "line": [
        "line",
        "boundary-line",
        "river",
        "path",
        "stream",
        "threat"
        ],
        "point": [
            "point",
            "airstrip",
            "animal",
            "boundary-line",
            "building",
            "camp",
            "clay",
            "community",
            "fishing-site",
            "gathering-site",
            "house",
            "hunting-site",
            "palm",
            "cave",
            "plant",
            "salt-lick",
            "waterfall",
            "special-site",
            "swidden",
            "threat",
            "tree"
        ],
        "vertex": [
        ],
        "relation": [
        ]
    }

Building configuration file

Compiling your configuration into a .mapeosettings file is the final
step for testing and using your configuration in Mapeo Mobile and
Desktop.

Building a configuration can be done in two ways:

-   ****preparing-computer.md(with Node.js and mapeo-settings-builder)
-   ****using-github-actions.md

Using GitHub Actions

It is possible to build a Mapeo configuration file using GitHub Actions.
This requires setting up your custom configuration directory as a
repository on Github.com, adding a /.github/workflows/build.yml script
to your repository, and committing changes to that repository.

{% hint style=“info” %} If you haven’t already used GitHub, you may want
to study the basics of how GitHub works before proceeding. {% endhint %}

{% hint style=“warning” %} Note that since this process relies on using
github.com, that you will need internet access to run the build action
and download the .mapeosettings configuration file. Hence, unlike
building a configuration preparing-computer.md, this process will not
work in an offline context. {% endhint %}

Setting up a configuration repository on GitHub

The first step will be to set up your configuration as a repository on
github.com, with the requisite build script files that will trigger a
GitHub Actions Workflow to generate your .mapeosettings file. There are
a few ways to do this.

If you do not have your own custom configuration already, and are
starting from scratch:

1.  You can fork or upload either the Mapeo Default Configuration or the
    Empty Mapeo Configuration template to your own GitHub account. The
    choice you make will depend on how you will go about creating your
    own configuration, as detailed in
    planning-configuration-and-data-structure.
2.  Make sure that you have the .github/workflows directory in your
    configuration repository.

If you already have your own custom configuration:

1.  Create a repository on GitHub for your custom configuration.
2.  Commit your existing configuration content to the repository.
3.  Download either the Mapeo Default Configuration or the Empty Mapeo
    Configuration, and copy over the .github directory to the root
    directory of your custom configuration.
4.  Commit these files to your repository on Github.com. (Github may ask
    you for additional permissions to add these files, by confirming via
    the browser.)

{% hint style=“info” %} NOTE: Depending on your operating system and
setup, it is possible that you do not see a .github/ directory anywhere.
You may need to enable viewing hidden files in your system file manager.
On MacOS, you can do so by pressing Command + Shift + . (period) in your
Finder window. {% endhint %}

Getting ready to build

Navigate to the Actions screen, and Click “I understand my workflows, go
ahead and enable them.”

This will bring you to a view of your Workflows. You should see a
message “There are no workflow runs yet” if you just enabled Workflows
for the first time. You are now ready to start building .mapeoconfig
files.

How it works

Once you have enabled Action Workflows on your configuration repository,
GitHub will generate a Workflow to build a new version of your
configuration every single time that you commit a change to your
repository.

Once you have committed a change to your repository, and navigate to the
Actions tab, you should see your commit message listed as a workflow.

-   :white_check_mark: a circular check indicates that the build has
    completed successfully.
-   :yellow_circle: a yellow circle indicates that the build is in
    process.
-   :red_circle: a red circle with an X indicates that the build has
    encountered an error.

You can click on your commit message to find out more about the status
of your build. For example, if your build has encountered an error,
there will be a log that can give you an idea of what went wrong. You
can commit a change to fix the error, and return to the Actions screen
to see if a new Workflow successfully bypasses the problem.

{% hint style=“info” %} This is the same log that you would see when
building a configuration preparing-computer.md. {% endhint %}

By opening the Workflow with your commit message, you can also download
a .zip file of your configuration, which includes a temporary
.mapeosettings file. This is helpful for testing out your configuration
before building a versioned file to distribute to users, as described in
testing-and-iterating.md.

Use conventional commit messages to increment your configuration version

The Mapeo GitHub Actions Workflow is set up to dynamically bump the
version of your configuration per each workflow. It does so using
conventional commit messaging of adding feat:, fix:, or chore: before
your commit message. For example, if you have a configuration with
version 1.1.0, the specific version bumps are as follows:

-   feat: this will increase your version to 1.2.0. This commit prefix
    could be used for major configuration updates.
-   fix: this will increase your version to 1.1.1. This commit prefix
    could be used for small updates like changing an icon, or adding a
    field to a category.
-   chore: this will not increase your version. This commit prefix could
    be used for correcting typos or fixing errors.

{% hint style=“info” %} To see a few examples of configuration
conventional commit messaging, see the screenshot above in
#how-it-works, or check out the commit history on the Mapeo Default
Configuration repository. {% endhint %}

You can also manually update the first number in your 1.1.0 version in
your package.json file, but Digital Democracy’s convention is to only do
so to indicate breaking changes. That said, you are free to choose a
versioning convention that makes the most sense to you.

Compile a final, versioned release of your configuration

Once you are done making changes, have tested your configuration using a
temporary .mapeosettings file (as described in #how-it-works) and in
accordance to the process described in testing-and-iterating.md, you can
generate a versioned release of your configuration. The way to do so is
as follows:

-   Navigate to the Actions tab for your GitHub repository. You should
    see all of your Workflows again.
-   On the left sidebar, click on the Build & Release link.
-   You should now see a box with the text “This workflow has a
    workflow_dispatch event trigger” and a button Run workflow. Click
    the button, and then click Run workflow again in the popup that will
    appear.

-   Doing so will trigger another Workflow titled “Build and Release.”
-   When that finished with a :white_check_mark: green check mark, your
    versioned build release will be ready. On the top navigation bar,
    click on Code and your release should appear under the Releases
    panel in the right sidebar.

-   Click on the release to download the versioned .mapeosettings file.
    # Via the command line

Prepare computer for building the configuration

Mapeo is built with JavaScript programming language. To get started,
you’ll need to installNode.jsdevelopment environment. If you already
have Node.js installed you can skip this section.

You need to be at least on Node.js version 8 (or higher) for the
mapeo-settings-builder to work properly. Head over to Node.js download
page and select installer for your operating system.

Alternatively you can also use NVM (Node Version Manager) to install and
manage multiple versions of Node.js on your computer.

Install nvm

    touch ~/.bash_profile
    curl -o- <https://raw.githubusercontent.com/creationix/nvm/v0.32.1/install.sh> | bash

Then close terminal and open again

Install homebrew (macOS)

http://brew.sh/

Install puppeteer dependencies (Windows Subsystem for Linux)

If you are using Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL) to build a
configuration, you need to install some dependencies for puppeteer.

    sudo apt install libgtk-3-dev libnotify-dev libgconf-2-4 libnss3 libxss1 libasound2

Install npm

https://docs.npmjs.com/cli/install

Install and use node 12

    nvm install 12
    nvm alias default 12

Install Mapeo Settings Builder

You’ll see output on the terminal, but this is OK

    npm install -g mapeo-settings-builder

Is your computer ready?

If your computer is ready to create configurations, type

    mapeo-settings-builder

You should see output that looks something like

    → Using version x.x.x of mapeo-settings-builder
    Usage: mapeo-settings-builder [options] [command]

    Options:
      -h, --help                   display help for command

    Commands:
      build [options] [sourceDir]  Build config from presets in current working dir
      lint [sourceDir]             Lint preset files for errors
      extract-messages [options]   Extract messages for translation
      generate-key                 Generate a random project key
      help [command]               display help for command

Now you’re ready to move to build your configuration!

Package Config Assets for MAPEO

Prep folder and build

Type, ’cd`, then a space, then drag and drop the folder where the
prepared assets are and press enter. It will look something like this

    cd /Users/jen/Documents/Dd_LOCAL_project-files/Dd-Tools/Mapeo/Presets/CREATION\\ LAB/Strathcona-KX-v1.0.0

You will then be ready to run scripts directly in the folder.

    npm install
    npm run -s build

This -s tells npm to be silent, so that you only see errors that are
meaningful to you.

You will see something like the following output. Errors will be
highlighted in RED with hopefully some helpful description so that you
can remedy the issue.

    → Using version x.x.x. of mapeo-settings-builder
    ! Warning: no category json files found in /home/okdistribute/node_modules/mapeo-default-settings/mapeo-default-settings-2.1.0/categories
    ✓ Built presets and categories (37ms)
    ✓ Generated svg sprite for iD (544ms)
    ✓ Generated png sprite for Mapbox (81ms)
    ✓ Generated png icons for Mapeo Mobile (607ms)
    ✓ Successfully created file 'build/mapeo-default-settings-v2.1.0.mapeosettings' (total 1299ms)

You’ll also see a .mapeosettings file inside of the build directory.

What is a .mapeosettings file?

A .mapeosettings file is a tar file, similar to a zip file. You can see
the contents of the file by changing the file extension to .tar and
using any application that can extract tar files (such as 7zip,
mentioned above).

Troubleshooting Checklist

Type the following into the terminal

    node -v

You need to be at least on Node version 8 for the mapeo-settings-builder
to work properly. If you need help, review the ‘Preparing Computer’
section and ensure you’re on the latest version of
mapeo-settings-builder.

    npm install -g mapeo-settings-builder@latest

You also may want to delete node_modules and install updated versions of
the dependencies.

In Mac or Linux, in the terminal:

    npm install

If you’re having more issues, please open an issue on the GitHub
repository or e-mail our support hotline.

Versioning

It’s important to increment the version when releasing new changes to
your configuration. When you are ready to release a new version, you can
use standard-version in the command line to automatically increment your
config version and update the CHANGELOG.md file in your repository.

{% hint style=“info” %} For more on versions with standard-version, see
#use-conventional-commit-messages-to-increment-your-configuration-version
{% endhint %} # Creating categories

{% hint style=“info” %} To review key information on defining
categories, see categories.md. {% endhint %}

In the presets directory, customize the .json files

In the presets directory, each .json file needs:

-   icon must mach the name of an icon in the icons folder - use prefix
    only, excluding the size refernce and file extension (eg. for
    fishing-24px.svg/fishing-100px.svg use fishing).
-   name will be the human-readable label shown to the user
-   geometry must be an array of point ,area, and/or line (All
    categories for use in Mapeo Mobile must include point.)
-   sort (optional) is an integer that will determine the order in which
    categories are displayed on the Categories screen of Mapeo Mobile.
    If no sort is included, categories will be listed alphabetically by
    name.
-   an array of fields (optional) which should match the key created in
    the fields directory. Fields will be displayed to users in the order
    they are listed in the fields array.
-   color (optional) determines the color of observation dots on the
    map. (Dots fall back to orange if no color is defined.) Value can be
    a hex code, CSS color name or any string supported by
    validate-color.

Example preset file (fishing-site.json):

    {
        "icon": "fishing",
        "name": "Fishing Site",
        "sort": 10,
        "color": "#13D5CF",
        "fields": [
            "name"
        ],
        "geometry": [
            "point",
            "area"
        ]
    }

Adding project name and version

The package.json file stores the name and version information users will
see in Mapeo when using the configuration.

Edit the name and version properties when creating a new configuration.
Additional information on incrementing versions will be covered in
building-configuration-file.

You can also add description, author, and license information to this
file but these properties will not be rendered in the Mapeo interface.

Example package.json file:

    {
      "name": "project-config",
      "version": "1.0.0",
      "description": "Mapeo configuration",
      "dependencies": {
        "mapeo-settings-builder": "^3.0.0",
        "mkdirp": "^0.5.1"
      },
      "devDependencies": {},
      "scripts": {
        "build": "basename=\"${npm_package_name}-v${npm_package_version}\"; mkdirp build/${basename}; mapeo-settings build -l 'en' -o build/${basename}.mapeosettings && tar -C \"build/${basename}\" -xf build/${basename}.mapeosettings",
        "test": "mapeo-settings lint"
      },
      "author": "Your Name",
      "license": "UNLICENSED",
      "private": true
    }

Details fields

What are details fields?

For each category in your configuration, you can include one or more
structured data fields (like a mini form or questionnaire) that users
can optionally fill out when creating a new observation or map element
with that category.
Details fields can be text fields (type in your own answer) or multiple
choice (select one or select many from a set of pre-defined answers).

How details fields are viewed in Mapeo

Details field screen displayed during data collection with Mapeo Mobile:

Considerations when defining details fields

When planning your data structure, you should think through which (if
any) details fields you would like to include for each category. The
same details field can be used for many categories.

For each details field you would like to include, you’ll need to define
the following:

-   Label
    The primary text to be displayed to users (“Name” in the above
    image).
-   Placeholder
    A hint or subtext that can clarify the field to users or provide
    guidance on how to use it (“Common name of this place” in the above
    image).
-   Field type
    How users will be able to enter information for the field or
    question.
    -   Text or type in your own answer (Pictured in the image above)

    -   Select one from a list of options

    -   Select multiple from a list of options

    -   Options
        For Select one and Select multiple fields, you will need to
        define a list of possible answers to display.

When defining details fields, keep in mind the following:

-   It can be very challenging for users to type in detailed information
    when collecting data in the field. Users may be under significant
    stress, in risky situations, or interacting with the Mapeo screen in
    bright sun or rain. When creating Text fields, keep in mind the
    conditions users will be facing and have reasonable expectations for
    the amount of detail and work required to fill out your details
    fields.
-   If there are a consistent set of answers you can anticipate for a
    field or question, it can be much faster or easier for users to
    select from a list as part of a Select one or Select multiple field.
    Please note that there is no automatic option for typing in
    information for “Other” or an option not included in the list.
-   It may be very clear to you when authoring your configuration what
    each details field means or intends to communicate. Keep in mind,
    however, who will be collecting data as part of your project and how
    they might read or interpret each field. Very clear and explicit
    language can go a long way towards ensuring your configuration is
    used as intended.
-   Mapeo Desktop currently allows you to filter observations by options
    in Select one fields. To filter by options in Select multiple or
    Text fields, you will need to export your data and view it in
    another software tool.

Generating details field files

All information you define for details fields will be formatted in JSON
in the coding-configuration process, detailed in the following section.

{% hint style=“info” %} If you are not comfortable working with JSON,
this information can be be passed off to someone with technical skills
to complete the steps in coding-configuration. {% endhint %} # Planning
configuration & data structure

Though some key steps of coding configurations require technical skills,
initial planning and consultation with project participants is essential
to designing effective data structures and does not require coding
skills.

To start the customization process, project participants should reflect
on the project goals, what kind of data will be needed, and what
properties might be required for data outputs.

If you have not already done so, work through the
what-information-to-collect section of this guide as a first step.

Data structure

When planning your configuration, you will need to think through what to
include for each of the key customizable areas of Mapeo. The pages that
follow will walk you through some considerations when determining
content for each area:

-   categories.md
    When collecting or creating data with Mapeo, users assign a
    top-level category to each observation or element on the map.
-   icons.md
    Each category you include must have an icon, or a small graphic to
    display to users when selecting a category.
-   details-fields.md (optional)
    For each category in your configuration, you can include one or more
    structured data fields (like a mini form or questionnaire) that
    users can optionally fill out when creating a new observation or map
    element with that category.

{% hint style=“info” %} Configurations can and often will evolve over
time. As you begin collecting data, you will likely find categories,
details fields and options you would like to add or modify. Unlike some
other survey or data collection tools, Mapeo allows a lot of flexibility
for changing configurations over time and does not require that the
database be wiped when changes are made. {% endhint %}

Documenting data structure

In order to create a Mapeo configuration file, the information you map
out for the above areas will need to be translated into JSON files and
.svg image files and then compiled. The details of this process will be
covered in coding-configuration.

If you do not have the technical skills required to code the
configuration yourself, the information you define in the following
pages for for categories.md, icons.md and details-fields.md can be
documented and passed off to a developer or individual with technical
skills to code and compile the configuration file. # Icons

What is an icon?

Each of the categories you include in your configuration needs to be
assigned an icon, or a small graphic to display to users when selecting
a category. You can assign the same icon to various cateogries, or each
category can have it’s own icon.

How icons are viewed in Mapeo

Categories list with icons in Mapeo Mobile (using the default
configuration):

Examples of the icon files from our default configuration can be found
here.

Considerations when designing icons

Though creating the .svg icon files requires some knowledge of image
editing tools, sketching and brainstorming ideas for icons can be a
great way to involve community members and project participants who may
not have technical skills. With paper and pencils, groups can come up
with ideas for icons to represent each category in your project.

If you’re not up for designing your own icon images, there are libraries
of images online with Creative Commons licenses that you can draw from.

When designing icons, keep in mind the following:

-   Icons are displayed as very small images in Mapeo Mobile (24x24px)
    and Mapeo Desktop (100x100px). Very simple designs with minimal
    detail will render more clearly to users.
    -   When thinking about size and scale, imagine drawing your icons
        with a marker on a dime.
-   Bold and solid-color lines and shapes will be most clearly visible.

Generating icon files

Once you’ve settled on the design or concept for your icons, you’ll need
to generate .svg files required to include as part of the
coding-configuration process.

To do so, you can use our online Mapeo Icons Generator, here.

Or, jump to creating-and-exporting-svg-files-using-adobe-illustrator.md
or creating-and-exporting-svg-files-using-inkscape.md for technical
guidelines in generating your own suitable SVG files.

{% hint style=“info” %} If you do not have skills to prepare the digital
icon files, paper sketches can be passed off to someone with technical
skills to complete the steps of generating icon files, outlined in
coding-configuration. {% endhint %} # Categories

What are categories?

When collecting or creating data with Mapeo, each observation or element
on the map is assigned a category. Users must select a single category
when creating a new observation or map element. Categories can be broad
or specific, depending on your context and project needs.

How categories are viewed in Mapeo

Categories list in Mapeo Mobile (using the default configuration):

Categories list in the Filters panel of Mapeo Desktop (using the default
configuration):

Considerations when defining categories

For each category you choose to include in your configuration, you’ll
need to determine the following:

-   Name
    ****The label users will see in Mapeo when viewing or selecting the
    category

-   Geometry
    ****Each element on the map will be marked as a
    ****point, line (eg. a path), or area (eg. a zone or lake). You will
    need to determine which of these geometries users will be able to
    use for each category.

    -   All data collected with Mapeo Mobile will be points. If you are
        using Mapeo Mobile, you should include point as a geometry for
        every category.
    -   If you are using Mapeo Desktop Territory mode as part of your
        project, you can also include line or area for categories where
        relevant.

-   Color (optional)
    You have the option of setting a custom color for the map dots or
    markers for each category in Mapeo Mobile and Mapeo Desktop
    Observations mode.

-   Sort order (optional)
    You have the option of determining the order in which you would like
    categories to appear on the Mapeo Mobile Categories screen (pictured
    above). If no order is added, categories will appear alphabetically
    by name.

When defining categories, keep in mind the following:

-   Categories are one of the key ways data can be filtered in Mapeo.
    Thinking through how you will view and use data once it has been
    created offers useful perspective when defining categories.
-   As a general rule, categories should not overlap - users should see
    only one option that fits when making a selection.
-   Categories and what would fall within them should be clear to those
    who will be collecting data. Training and information sessions may
    be critical for ensuring that project participants know how to
    gather data in consistent ways, but clarity and simplicity in
    configuration authoring goes a long way.
-   The space available to display category names is limited, especially
    in Mapeo Mobile, so names should be generally be brief.

Generating category files

All information you define for categories will be formatted in JSON in
the coding-configuration process, detailed in the following section.

{% hint style=“info” %} If you are not comfortable working with JSON,
this information can be be passed off to someone with technical skills
to complete the steps in coding-configuration. {% endhint %} # ⚙
Customization options

Mapeo was built to be highly customizable and allow users to adapt its
interface to meet the needs of specific projects. This section covers
both translation of the application and the development of custom
configurations and base maps in the pages below:

-   translating.md (novice, intermediate)
-   custom-configurations(advanced)
-   custom-base-maps (advanced)

{% hint style=“warning” %} Please note that the customization process
for configurations and base maps currently requires significant
technical knowledge and will not be accessible to all users. {% endhint
%}

Custom background maps

About custom background maps

Custom background maps allow Mapeo users to incorporate a wide range of
geographical datasets and relevant elements into the maps used for
displaying current position and data collected. Once added to Mapeo,
custom background maps are available completely offline within the
application.

Creating custom background maps

{% hint style=“warning” %} Creating custom background maps currently
requires significant technical knowledge and will not be accessible to
all users.

The current process, detailed in creating-custom-maps, requires comfort
installing and using node packages via the command line. {% endhint %} #
Creating custom background maps

We are currently working on a new user interface to simplify the process
of generating and adding custom background maps to Mapeo. This page
covers the generation of custom map files for both for the current
(non-experimental) map server AND for the new experimental Background
maps feature in Mapeo Mobile.

Current (non-experimental) workflow

For creating custom background maps that work with the current
(non-experimental) map server, you can view documentation of the
existing process here.

-   For instructions on how to add these maps to Mapeo, see:
    adding-custom-base-maps-to-mapeo-mobile.md
    adding-custom-base-maps-to-mapeo-desktop.md

New experimental Background Maps feature

For generating map files in .mbtiles format to test out the new
experimental Mapeo Mobile Background Maps feature, see here.

-   For instructions on how to add these maps to Mapeo, see:
    background-maps.md

Generating map files in .mbtiles format for the experimental Background Maps feature

{% hint style=“warning” %} Generating custom background maps currently
requires significant technical knowledge and will not be accessible to
all users. {% endhint %}

Generating custom background maps in mbtiles format for the new Background Maps feature

{% hint style=“info” %} For creating custom background maps that work
with the current (non-experimental) map server, you can view
documentation of the existing process here. {% endhint %}

Mapeo Mobile 5.5.0 introduces a new Map Manager user interface for
importing and managing multiple background maps. The Background Maps
feature is currently experimental and needs to be activated in
Experiments; once that has been done, Mapeo Mobile will start to use the
new user interface. To find out more about the new feature, see
background-maps.md.

The Background Maps feature comes with a new map server that uses a tile
format called mbtiles. This is a different format than what Mapeo was
using before, so if you’ve added your own custom map tiles (either in
.asar or in a directory format), they will not work with the new map
server. You will need to convert these to mbtiles, or make new tiles in
the mbtiles format. This applies to both raster and vector map tiles.

{% hint style=“info” %} Note: the Background Maps map server is able to
load both raster and vector tiles; however, the experimental version can
only import an unstyled vector mbtiles file. This means that the
geometries in your mbtiles map tiles can be shown as a background map,
but instead of being styled by means a style.json file, the Map Manager
will use randomized colors to visualize the different geometries.

In future releases of Mapeo, we will make it possible to add a vector
map style as well. {% endhint %}

Generating new mbtiles using QGIS

One easy and free way to have access to use mbtiles with the new
Background Maps feature, which does not require using any command line
tools or scripts, is to generate them using QGIS.

QGIS is a free and open-source cross-platform desktop geographic
information system application that supports viewing, editing, printing,
and analysis of geospatial data. It is often used in tandem with Mapeo;
for example, once a lot of data has already been collected, and the next
step is to visualize that data or create cartographic maps.

{% hint style=“info” %} QGIS has extensive documentation for use of the
tool, accessible at https://docs.qgis.org/. {% endhint %}

QGIS can also be used to generate both raster and vector mbtiles using
an easy user interface.

First, ensure that you have some map data loaded on your QGIS map
canvas. This can be either vector data (such as Esri shapefiles) or
raster data, such as satellite imagery or XYZ tiles loaded through a
source on the internet.

In what follows, we will be creating raster mbtiles using XYZ tiles
(raster) from Bing maps, loaded through the internet. At the end of this
section, some information on generating vector mbtiles is provided.

{% hint style=“info” %} This page has guidance on how to add a number of
different XYZ tile sources to QGIS, including Bing maps, OpenStreetMaps,
Google Terrain, and more. {% endhint %}

Next, open the Processing menu and select Toolbox. Search for mbtiles in
the search box of the sidebar that opens up.

In what follows, we are going to generate Raster mbtiles. However, the
process is the same if you have Vector data to generate as mbtiles.

Double click on Generate XYZ Tiles and enter the following values in the
modal box that opens up. Leave all of the other values (such as DPI,
metatile size) be, there is no need to change these.

-   Extent: This is the extent at which your map tiles will be
    downloaded. At lower zoom levels, it will actually exceed this
    extent as it will download very large areas as one tile, which
    intersect with that extent; but as you get to higher zoom levels,
    only map tiles within that extent will be downloaded.
    This field takes four coordinates, and the easiest way to set them
    is to either use the current map canvas extent, or to drawn them
    directory on the map. You could also use a vector geometry to set
    the coordinates.
-   Minimum zoom: Best practice is to set this to 0, which is the whole
    world. Lower zoom levels do not take up much space at all, and it’s
    a good user experience to be able to see more of the world at lower
    levels.
-   Maximum zoom: As with all background map tiles, this is an important
    thing to get right, and there are trade-offs between level of detail
    (zoom level) and file size. Each zoom level increases your mbtiles
    file size by 4. It is recommended to do some calculations on how big
    your file will be in advance, for example using Mapbox’s offline
    tile estimator tool.
    -   It can also be handy to consider OpenStreetMap’s guide on Zoom
        Levels for considering an optimal zoom level for your map data.
        Depending on the m / pixel of your data, you may not need to go
        very high. For example, PlanetScope data from Planet is only 3m
        in resolution, and so using either zoom level 13 or 14 is
        sufficient to capture the full detail of the imagery. This will
        also depend on your use case, and what kind of detail is helpful
        for your mapping scenario.
-   Tile format: It is recommended to change this to JPG because JPG
    files take up less space.
-   Output: Here, you want to define the path and name of your mbtiles
    file.

When you are finished inputting the values, you can click Run at the
bottom, and the tile generation script should commence. Depending on
your extent and maximum zoom level, it may take quite a while, but you
should see at least the first zoom levels (0 to 8 or so) be generated
rather quickly in the Log tab which opens up automatically when you
clicked Run.

When the process is finished, you should see messaging that the
“Algorithm ‘Generate XYZ tiles (MBTiles)’ finished,” and you should find
your mbtiles file in the directory that you specified.

{% hint style=“success” %} For generating vector mbtiles, the process is
even more straightforward. The only thing you need to set in the Write
Vector Tiles (MBTiles) are minimum zoom level and maximum zoom level;
and, you need to select the vector input layers on your map canvas that
you want to generate tiles from. For vector tiles, extent is optional.
The other thing worth adding is Metadata: name. Your background map will
inherit this name when added to Mapeo, so it will be good to provide a
specific name to distinguish it from other background maps. {% endhint
%}

Converting your existing Mapeo tiles into mbtiles format

{% hint style=“warning” %} This workflow involves running command-line
tools such as Python and Node.
While it’s possible to follow this workflow without familiarity of these
tools, you should at least be familiar with the basics of working in a
Unix terminal. You may also encounter difficulties that require
additional troubleshooting.
Some technical experience is therefore recommended. {% endhint %}

If you have existing map tiles in asar or directory (xyz) format, there
is a command-line tool called mbutil you can use to convert those to
mbtiles. The workflow for using this tool is as follows.

Dependencies:

-   Make sure you have Python installed (ideally 3, but 2 works too).
-   You need to have npm installed if your vector tiles are in a
    .vector.pbf format.

Steps to follow:

1.  First, ensure that your tiles are in xyz format. If they are still
    compressed as an asar file, first unpack the file through the
    command:
    asar extract [filename].asar [directory name]
2.  Navigate to the root of the tile directory in the terminal:
    cd path/to/directory
3.  Identify what format your tiles are in by opening up one of the zoom
    level directories (e.g. 0, 1, 2…) and then going one directory
    deeper, until you see files ending in pbf.
    -   If your files end in .pbf, you may proceed to step 4.
    -   If your files end in .vector.pbf, first follow to the next
        section
        #extra-step-for-vector-tiles-if-they-are-in-.vector.pbf-format
        on renaming .vector.pbf to .pbf, before proceeding to step 4.
4.  Create a virtual Python environment. NAME_OF_ENV can be an arbitrary
    name.
    python3 -m venv NAME_OF_ENV
5.  Activate the virtual environment. You need to run this whenever
    working in this project. This ensures dependencies and other
    project-specific tooling are properly referenced.
    source ./NAME_OF_ENV/bin/activate
6.  Install dependencies, which will include the mbutil tool:
    python3 -m pip install -r requirements.txt
7.  Use the installed mb-util executable to create the mbtiles file:
    ./env/bin/mb-util DIRECTORY OUTPUT.mbtiles
    -   DIRECTORY points to the path containing the tiles directory you
        wish to convert. It’s relative to where the command is run.
    -   OUTPUT can be any name that you want your mbtiles file to be
        called.
    -   See mbutil documentation for additional relevant flags related
        to tile scheme, image format, etc.
8.  When you’re done, you can deactivate the virtual environment by
    running:
    deactivate

Extra step for vector tiles if they are in .vector.pbf format

If your vector tiles end in .vector.pbf, you need to first run a script
to change the suffix to just .pbf instead. In the future, we will make
it easier to handle this when importing tiles, so you won’t have to do
anything. However, for now you have to use a node tool called
recursive-rename.

1.  In the terminal, navigate to the directory containing your XYZ tile
    directory, and install the tool npm install recursive-rename.
2.  Run the following command: rename vector.pbf pbf. This will batch
    rename all of the individual tile files in each of the
    subdirectories per zoom level (0, 1, 2, …).
3.  Now you are ready to use mbutil to convert the XYZ directory to
    mbtiles.

{% hint style=“info” %} For instructions on how to import your .mbtiles
file into Mapeo for use in the experimental Background Maps feature,
see:

Broken link {% endhint %}

Welcome – Introduction

Welcome land defenders, community mappers, resource and impact monitors,
data collectors, students, scientists - whoever you are, we hope you
have enjoyed playing around with Mapeo using the Quickstart guide above.

If you think that Mapeo might be the right tool for your project, this
Complete Reference Guide is designed to provide you with learning and
training materials, suggested workflows, and some examples of real
projects in order to help get you set up and using Mapeo in the best
possible way for your needs.

There is a LOT of information in the sections below, and there are many
different ways of using Mapeo. We don’t expect users to make use of
every Mapeo feature nor need to read every section, but we do hope that
what we are providing here can help users be well informed about
technical details that will impact your projects. # Installing Mapeo
Desktop

Mapeo Desktop is available for Windows, MacOS and Linux and can be
downloaded for free from the Mapeo website.

{% hint style=“info” %} If you are planning to install the application
on a computer that does not have an internet connection, make sure to
download the installation file prior to going offline.
For more details on offline installation, see #installing-offline below.
{% endhint %}

Download the installation file

If you have an internet connection, you can download the Mapeo Desktop
installation file for free from http://mapeo.app.

{% hint style=“info” %} It is important to select and use the correct
installation file for your operating system:

-   Windows:.exe
-   macOS: .dmg or .zip
-   Linux:.AppImage {% endhint %}

Go to the mapeo.app website and click on Download. A download of the
installation file for your operating system should start automatically.
If the download does not start automatically, or if you’d like to
download installation files to use on another operating system, you can
find download options at the bottom of the page.

[]

Once you have the installation file downloaded, follow the detailed
steps in the sections below to install Mapeo Desktop on the appropriate
operating system for your computer:

-   **** Install on Windows
-   **** Install on macOS
-   **** Install on Linux

Install on Windows

1.  If you don’t yet have the installation file for Windows, download
    it.
2.  Find the Mapeo installation file (.exe) on your computer and double
    click on it to install. If you get a security message from your
    operating system, click on Execute anyway.\

[]

Mapeo Desktop will open automatically when the installation process
finishes. If not, go to your computer’s desktop or Apps and click the
Mapeo Desktop icon to open the application.

Install on macOS ​

1.  If you don’t yet have the installation file for macOS, download it.
2.  Find the Mapeo installation file (.dmg) on your computer and double
    click on it to open.
3.  Drag the Mapeo icon into your Applications folder.
4.  Once the install is complete, find Mapeo in your Applications folder
    and double click it to open.

{% hint style=“warning” %} If you receive a security message that Mapeo
cannot be opened, go to System Preferences, then select Security &
Privacy.

On the bottom half of the window, you should see the message “Mapeo was
blocked from use because it is not from an identified developer.” Click
on Open anyway, then on Open in the pop-up confirmation window. Mapeo
Desktop will then open automatically.
{% endhint %}

Install on Linux

Download installation file

If you don’t have the installation file for Linux, download it.

Enable executable permissions

In order to install from the .AppImage file, you’ll need to ensure that
the file has permissions to run as a program. Find where the
installation file was saved on your computer and right-click the file.
Select Properties from the menu.

Click on the Permissions tab at the top of the Properties window, then
click the checkbox to Allow this file to run as a program.

Install

Double click the .AppImage file and Mapeo Desktop should open
automatically.

Installing offline 

If you previously downloaded or have access to an installation file, you
can use it install Mapeo Desktop on other computers without an internet
connection.

{% hint style=“info” %} You can copy the installation file to another
computer using a USB drive or send it via Bluetooth. This does not
require an internet connection. For more on these methods, see
sharing-files-between-devices.md. {% endhint %}

Now that you have pasted the installation file onto another computer,
follow these steps to install Mapeo:

-   Install on Windows
-   **** Install on macOS
-   **** Install on Linux # 💻 Mapeo Desktop installation & setup

This section will cover all the necessary steps to install and set up
Mapeo Desktop on your computer:

-   installing-mapeo-desktop.md
-   app-settings.md
-   importing-configurations.md
-   adding-custom-base-maps-to-mapeo-desktop.md
-   updating-mapeo-desktop.md

Before you start, make sure that:

-   Your computer battery is fully charged or you have access to a
    charger and electrical outlet.
-   Your computer is virus-free. # Updating Mapeo Desktop

Like most existing apps, Mapeo Desktop is in continuous development. We
frequently release new versions of the application to fix technical
issues or add new functionality.

When you update Mapeo Desktop, you do not lose data you have collected
or synchronized using a previous version.

To update Mapeo Desktop, follow the same steps of the installation
process using a newer installation file. Before starting, ensure that
the Mapeo Desktop application is not open. Then, follow the steps below
for:

{% content-ref url=“installing-mapeo-desktop.md” %}
installing-mapeo-desktop.md {% endcontent-ref %}

{% hint style=“info” %} To update files used within Mapeo Desktop, such
as configurations or background maps, follow the same steps detailed in
the sections below using the new files:
importing-configurations.mdadding-custom-base-maps-to-mapeo-desktop.md
{% endhint %}

Mapeo versions - information and naming conventions

For details on Mapeo version numbers and naming conventions,
see:#mapeo-versions-information-and-naming-conventions

Installation files for older versions of Mapeo Desktop

To view all previous versions of Mapeo Desktop, including release notes
for changes made in each version, see the Mapeo Desktop Releases page on
GitHub. # Adding custom background maps to Mapeo Desktop

By default, Mapeo Desktop in Observations mode uses abackground map that
shows some geographical elements such as rivers and hills, as well as
some political and urban elements such as borders, cities, roads, etc.
Mapeo Desktop in Territory mode offers a range of background maps
including satellite imagery, OpenStreetMap, and more.

If you have a custom background map, you can add it and use it in Mapeo
Desktop without affecting the data collected. (For more on creating
custom background maps, see custom-base-maps.)

{% hint style=“danger” %} Adding a background map to Mapeo Desktop
requires some technical skills and should be done by someone comfortable
copying and pasting files within the internal file system. A mistake in
this process could cause irreversible undesired effects. {% endhint %}

To add a background map to Mapeo Desktop, follow the instructions below
for your operating system:

-   Windows computer
-   macOS computer

Windows computer

Locate and copy the contents of the Mapeo background map package 

Mapeo background maps will often be shared as a compressed file(.zip).
If your background map is a .zip file, double click the file to unzip
it.

Standard vector background maps for Mapeo will contain the file elements
listed below: 3 folders and 2 files.

{% hint style=“info” %} Raster background maps will contain different
files and folders than those pictured above. Raster maps for Mapeo
consist of one folder (tiles) and one file (style.json). {% endhint %}

Select and copy all of the elements found inside your background map
folder.

Paste the copied elements into the Mapeo/styles/default folder

1.  In the Windows search engine, type %APPDATA% , and open the folder
    that appears with this name.
2.  Inside the AppData folder, click on the Mapeo subfolder, then click
    on the styles subfolder.
3.  If there is not already a default folder inside your styles folder,
    you will need to create one. To do so, right-click inside the styles
    folder and create a new folder named default.
4.  Paste the background map elements you copied into the default
    folder.

Reload Mapeo Desktop

Use Ctrl + R on your keyboard to reload Mapeo or restart Mapeo Desktop
to begin using the custom background map.

{% hint style=“info” %} For more on loading custom background maps into
Territory mode in Mapeo Desktop, see changing-basemaps.md in the
using-mapeo-desktop-to-create-territory-information section. {% endhint
%}

macOS computer

Locate and copy the contents of the Mapeo background map package 

Mapeo background maps will often be shared as a compressed file(.zip).
If your background map is a .zip file, double click the file to unzip
it.

A Mapeo background map consists of several folders and files that need
to be copied into the file system of Mapeo Desktop. Standard vector
background maps for Mapeo will contain the file elements listed below -
3 folders and 2 files.

{% hint style=“info” %} Raster background maps will contain different
files and folders than those pictured above. Raster maps for Mapeo
consist of one folder (tiles) and one file (style.json). {% endhint %}

Select and copy all of the elements found inside your background map
folder.

Navigate to the Mapeo/styles folder

1.  Click on Finder on your computer.
2.  In the top menu bar, click on Go, then select Go to Folder…
3.  Type in ~/Library/Application Support/Mapeo/styles in the address
    bar and click on Go.

Paste the copied elements into the Mapeo/styles/default folder

If there is not already a default folder inside your styles folder, you
will need to create one. To do so, control-click inside the styles
folder and create a new folder named default.

Paste the background map elements you copied into the default folder.

Restart Mapeo Desktop

Use Command (⌘)-R on your keyboard to reload Mapeo or restart Mapeo
Desktop to begin using the custom background map.

{% hint style=“info” %} For more on loading custom background maps into
Territory mode in Mapeo Desktop, see changing-basemaps.md in the
using-mapeo-desktop-to-create-territory-information section. {% endhint
%} # Choosing Mapeo Desktop language

Mapeo Desktop is currently available in Spanish (es), English (en),
Portuguese (pt) and French (fr), Thai (th), Vietnamese (vi) and Khmer
(km), but it can be translated into any language using Crowdin. For more
on translation, see: translating.md.

Changing the language of Mapping Desktop is a simple step and does not
affect the data collected or the categories used to create observations.
Mapeo Desktop should open initially in the current language you have
selected for your computer’s operating system.
To change the Mapeo Desktop language:

1.  Open Mapeo Desktop.
2.  On the Top menu bar, click on View and select Change language.
3.  Select the desired language and click on SUBMIT. You may see a white
    screen for a few seconds as the interface language changes.

[]

{% hint style=“warning” %} If the language does not change
automatically, restart Mapeo Desktop. {% endhint %} # Importing
configurations to Mapeo Desktop

To start using a custom configuration, you’ll need to import the new
configuration file into Mapeo Desktop. For more on configurations, see
custom-configurations.

Locate the configuration file

Download or copy the custom configuration file (eg.
example_project.mapeosettings) onto your computer. Note which folder the
file was saved in.

{% hint style=“info” %} For sending configuration files (.mapeosettings)
between computers that have an internet connection, we recommend using
email or the Telegram Desktop app, as other messaging applications have
problems with this file format. You can also share a link to a Drive
directory where the configuration is located.

If you have no internet connection, you can copy the file from a
computer using a USB drive or send the file via Bluetooth. For more on
these methods, see: sharing-files-between-devices.md. {% endhint %}

Import the configuration

1.  Open Mapeo Desktop.
2.  On the Top menu bar, click File and select Import Configuration.
3.  In the pop-up window, navigate to the folder on the computer where
    you saved the configuration file (.mapeosettings) you want to
    import. Click on the file, then click Open. You may see a white
    screen for a few seconds while the configuration changes.

[] # 🗒 Essentials for a successful Mapeo project

In the pages below you’ll find a collection of resources to support in
getting a Mapeo project started.

-   planning
-   security-and-risk-assessment.md (Coming soon)
-   creating-user-protocols.md (Coming soon)

Additional information on running trainings in Mapeo can be found in
training-and-information-sessions. # Creating user protocols

{% hint style=“info” %} Coming soon {% endhint %} # Security & risk
assessment

{% hint style=“info” %} Coming soon {% endhint %}

What are the parameters?

No two Mapeo projects will look the same even if they have the same aims
and are using the same configuration. There are so many factors which
will influence how a project is run including timeline; budget;
technology; landscape; seasons; climate; culture; social and political
context; etc.

Whilst we can provide some ideas here, any project should be tailored to
your particular context taking into account answers to the following
questions. Thinking through these questions in advance will also be
useful if you ask for help to put together a mapping project from an
ally or other organisation.

What is your timeline?

Is there a particular urgency for the work, a date you need to produce a
map or collect data by? If there isn’t an internal deadline, are there
significant dates external to the project that you might want to work
towards or include within your calendar (eg. visits by authorities to
the area, International meetings such as COP or UN Working Groups, World
Social Forums etc.).

What does the geographical landscape look like? What accessibility issues are there?

Think about what the land looks like and how you plan to travel around.
Some projects might be focused on a small area in town, where people can
just travel around on foot on paved roads, other projects might cover
tens of thousands of hectares and require travel by river, up steep
hills, into swamps etc. Perhaps there are areas you want to access that
are off limits (eg. National borders or Industrial installations can
have no-go zones around them, or have rules about using GPS or drones
etc) Drawing a quick sketchmap of the the area you plan to work within,
and marking any significant landmarks, access routes, barriers etc. can
help you plan out how you or your team is going to get around and how
long this will take, and help identify any challenges you might
encounter ahead of time.

Do the seasons affect your work?

If you plan to collect data at a particular time of year consider how
the season or climate might affect this. For example the dry / rainy
seasons might impact how easily you can move around the land, and might
also impact the type of data you can collect (for example travel by
river might be easier in the rainy season, but travel by road or foot
might be harder); likewise some operations or activities you want to map
or monitor might only occur at certain times of year (eg. illegal
logging is linked to seasons, as are fruiting trees and fish/animal
movements).

Do you have a budget?

Do you have or need a budget, and if so how much? Do you intend to pay
people to take part or is it volunteer-led? If you don’t already have a
budget are there parts of the work that are going to need funds such as
for purchasing equipment, travelling around or for any meetings you
intend to hold.

Do you have or need equipment for your project?

Mapeo Mobile works on Android phones & tablets and Mapeo Desktop on
Windows/Mac/Linux operating systems. Whilst essentially you might just
need one smart phone for your project (which you might already have in
your back pocket!), depending upon your plan, and particularly if you
are going to work with teams in complicated environments you might need
to think about other equipment such as spare battery packs if you are
doing multi-day trips in remote areas; usb or hard drives for backups;
trekking and medical kits for teams; waterproofing for tech that might
be exposed to the elements etc., large sheets of paper, marker pens and
notebooks for community workshops.

See equipment list for a list of things partners we have worked with
have found useful.

What is the security situation?

Unfortunately, many frontline defenders are targeted for their work,
often risking their lives to defend their peoples rights, lands and
futures. Please consider your own safety and that of anyone else
involved in the project and take what measures you can to identify risks
ahead of time and mitigate them where possible, whilst doing the work
that you need to do.

For example:

-   Do you need to keep team members, or the names of people interviewed
    or otherwise involved in the project, or would it be better to
    involve the media and ensure there is a spotlight on the work?
-   Are there places you can avoid going to and questions can avoid
    asking so as to not trigger dangerous responses?
-   Do your teams need some kind of backup to keep them safe, a
    satellite phone, tracker or civil society accompaniment?

Data security

Sometimes it is not people that are at risk but data - consider
therefore if you are collecting data that could be valuable to others
and how you can best keep it safe.

Information can be sensitive in other ways too: perhaps only certain
members of a community normally have access to it (but still want it
documented) or perhaps it is information that the community does not
want to make public.

Mapeo does not make any of your data public unless you choose to share
it, you can create reports or export data which is filtered to exclude
sensitive places or pieces of information, and you can share information
with team members without it going online.

However there are other measures you can take to protect your
information if needed, creating passwords for your devices … what else?
# What outputs do you want?

It might be too early to start thinking about outputs, but if you
already have a sense of what these might be then they might give some
useful direction to your planning process. By output we don’t mean the
goal or results of your project, although these might overlap, we are
referring particularly to concrete materials that result from your Mapeo
project.

For example these could be:

-   Printed map / maps: These might be for an external audience such as
    the government or a legal body, or they might be for the community
    itself to use for other purposes. If you are planning on creating a
    map then consider what information you can show on the map - perhaps
    you spend a long time collecting stores which then are hard to find
    space for, or you collect so much information that the map is hard
    to read.
-   Data reports: You might want to produce regular reports on the data
    you collect, or wait until the end of your project and then produce
    a report with all the data or the highlights. Do your reports
    include quantitative data that you want to analyse and present in a
    particular way or is it mainly qualitative data that will need
    editing or compiling before presentation. Thinking about these can
    help you to organise your teams and data collection so that you have
    the data when you need it, in the right format.
-   Alerts: If you are collecting evidence of something that needs fast
    action then having an alert system built into your methodology could
    help. Mapeo Mobile can export datapoints to WhatsApp and other apps
    so you could potentially send alerts of illegalities straight to law
    enforcers for immediate action.
-   Interactive webmap: This could be a good output if you are hoping to
    build a campaign and want to share some of the project with the
    public or media - or even for your own community such as for an
    educational or storytelling resource. It also enables different
    kinds of information to be present than on a printed map as you can
    include videos and audio more easily. However it may involve a level
    of technical expertise or budget beyond the scope of your project,
    and it is definitely not the right output for every goal.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Planning

You may be keen to jump in and get started with data collection, however
spending a bit of time upfront thinking through how the project will
run, the methodology, team set-up, logistics of gathering data, and how
the data collected or created with Mapeo will be used can save you a lot
of time and avoid problems and issues later on.

This guide does not aim to give you a blueprint of how to run your
project. There are so many different uses of Mapeo, some of these we
(Digital Democracy) can imagine, some of them we can’t, and each one has
its own particular needs, priorities and local contexts. What works in
one place might need to be set up very differently for another place,
even if the desired outcome is very similar. And likewise what works
somewhere at one time, might have to be adjusted for another time as
local situations, politics, etc. change.

Hopefully spending time thinking through the questions below will enable
you to create a process tailored to your needs and project, and give it
the best possible chance of success.

We are going to run through the following questions:

-   Why collect information? What is the aim of your mapping, monitoring
    or data collection, what is your goal or desired end product or
    result?
-   What outputs do you want? If you already know that you want to build
    an interactive story map, or produce a quantitative report or file a
    legal case, this can help shape your project design.
-   What information do you need to collect in order to meet this aim?
-   Who should be involved? What project structure will best meet your
    aims, who should be involved, what roles do you need, who is making
    decisions and who are you accountable to?
-   What are the parameters or limiting factors you are working with?
    This refers to your geographical context, infrastructure,
    accessibility to areas, budgets and equipment availability, time
    constraints, security risks, etc.
-   Is Mapeo the right tool for you?We think Mapeo is great :) but we
    know that it has limits and it isn’t the right tool for every job.
    We want to make sure that if you choose Mapeo you understand what it
    excels at doing and also its weaknesses, to make sure you are set up
    in the best possible way for success in your project.

Provisos

Mapeo was co-developed with community land defenders in the Amazon. We
have tested, piloted and received feedback on it from people around the
world using it for a variety of purposes, and we hope it can serve a
wide range of needs. However it is built with the needs of land and
rights defenders at its heart, and therefore this guide, and many of the
materials produced for Mapeo are also built with these needs at the
forefront.

In part because of its design process, and the partners with whom
Digital Democracy has worked, we often refer to community and
collaborative processes. Mapeo can definitely also be used by
individuals, and a variety of different teams, but many of our partners
are using it in local, frontline community contexts, and so the language
of this guide centers them. We also understand that communities are not
homogenous and mean different things in different places, and hope that
you can read between the lines where necessary to extract the useful
parts of this guide for whatever it means to you.

This guide draws on work from our team over the last two decades in
indigenous and community land rights and defense. However indigenous and
marginalized communities have been defending their land for centuries.
There are many projects and initiatives from which the development of
Mapeo and the methodologies suggested here have been guided, received
inspiration and learned. This reference guide does not aim to provide an
exhaustive list of such projects, but at the end of the guide there is a
Reference Section which highlights some materials from other sources and
initiatives which may be of help to you in planning your project.

All the examples included in the guide are just that, examples. We hope they are helpful and provide some context and illustration to the processes described, but are not intended to be taken and copied as ‘out of the box’ methodologies. As we hope this planning section will describe, context is everything, and methodology should be carefully considered and adapted to best fit the needs of the project and particular community context.

description: >- What team structure will best meet your aims; who should
be involved, what roles do you need; who is making decisions and who are
you accountable to? —

Who should be involved and how?

The answer to this question of who should be involved could vary wildly.
Perhaps it is just you and your mobile phone, or perhaps it is going to
involve thousands of people across multiple countries working together
to compile a mass of data. Most of the partners we have worked with
directly are somewhere in between, often a community or group of
communities with a dedicated team of collaborating to collect data.

However even the projects we have partnered on directly, which might
look superficially very similar, have set up their project structures in
very different ways, sometimes out of need and sometimes out of
preference. So here are some things to consider.

Are there any traditional or other authorities that should be consulted
before you start, or who should be involved in some role? This is
particularly relevant if you are collecting data from indigenous lands
(your own or belonging to others) and/or might be collecting potentially
sensitive data.

Who is your project accountable to and how can you ensure you meet their
needs? The answer to this might be the traditional authorities mentioned
above, or it could be particular sectors of your community, funders, the
future generations or others. Consider how to keep them up to date with
project progress if relevant and how to produce materials they will find
accessible and useful.

Do different members of your community hold different knowledge that you
want to ensure is represented. How can you honour and involve these
people and their knowledge? Think here about women, elders and young
people in particular, and how to ensure they are involved in the work
and that they are not simply used to extract information from. Then
depending upon the details of your project other groups might arise:
traditional healers; skilled artisans; storytellers; health workers etc.

Consider the ownership of the project: If the project is meeting needs
identified by your community, or collecting data intrinsic to them or
their future consider how to ensure the community feels involved in the
work and feels ownership over any results. Mapeo was built to try and
facilitate community ownership of both projects and data by having a
simple interface that could be explained to people without data
collection training and people who might be non-literate or unused to
computers or smartphones. Involving people at different stages of the
project, including the planning phase can help increase this feeling of
ownership, as can keeping the data locally, providing frequent feedback
and reports back on what is happening, and creating outputs that people
can use themselves or see at work.

What other stakeholders or people with interest or authority do you want
to involve? Perhaps there are people who it would be useful to involve
because they could help the project reach its goal such as local
authorities, law enforcement, press, park rangers. Think about what role
they might have in the project, whether they are consulted about things
in advance or are simply informed and kept up to date with project
progress. Consider too if there are people you want to keep the work and
data secret from due to security or other considerations.

Who is going to collect your data? Unless yours is a solo project you
are going to need to work with a team or teams of people to collect your
data. This will be particularly necessary if you need to cover a large
area of land, have time constraints or need different skills on your
team. Think about the composition of the team and how you are going to
build it - is it something people will volunteer for or will they be
asked? Do you need to ensure diverse representation and if so how will
you do this? Do you want to involve as many people as possible or have a
small team that moves around?

What other roles do you need? If you are working with a team or teams of
data collectors or mappers you are likely to need someone to coordinate
them, help plan trips, collate the data they collect, analyse it and
prepare any reports or outputs. This might be the role of a single
coordinator, or you might need multiple ones due to the number of people
involved or because of cultural or political sensitivities or the way
the project ownership is set up. You might also have people involved in
training, decision making, liaising with external bodies, helping with
legal and communications work etc.

What skills do people need? We hope Mapeo is to learn and use, but if
you are working in a team and want to collect comparable data people
will need some training in how to use the app, and how to use it in the
way your project needs. There might be other trainings necessary such as
training in basic smartphone usage if people aren’t accustomed to it;
training in taking good photographs that illustrate what you want to
show; training in gps; drones; video; audio recording; oral history
recording; GIS software etc. conflict resolution, de-escalation etc
depending on the details of your project.

Create a project protocol: Writing a protocol, if possible in a
collaborative manner, which lays out any different roles within the
project, their relationship to the data, agreements about use and
ownership of data, any payments that are being made, what will happen to
equipment and data at the end of a project etc. can be a way to keep
things transparent and accountable and help avoid issues during and
after the work.

Why - what is the project goal?

So you want to start collecting information, perhaps you are going to be
making a map, or perhaps you want to collect evidence of impacts on your
land or gather other data or information. The first question to clearly
ask of yourself or your community is WHY? What is it that you hope to
gain or change or learn through the project?

The more detailed an answer you can give to this question the better set
up you can get; making sure anyone involved in the project is working
towards the same goal and being able to determine the best methodology
for meeting it.

For example, if you want to make a map – what is your map for, what
impact do you want it to have for you, your team, in the world, etc.
Perhaps the map is the end product, or perhaps just one step in a longer
process, or maybe the main aim is building relationships, and the map is
the means to bring people a focus for working together.

What if you don’t know yet? Perhaps you know you want to gather data
about something that interests you but are not yet sure how you are
going to use it. Don’t worry, you can refine your aim and build on your
project as you go along and learn more.

And remember - all plans change and it is impossible to predict
everything in advance. There will be unforeseen outcomes, some
beneficial, some possibly challenging, of your project. However having
your main goal in mind as you begin to plan your methodology and define
what information you are going to collect sets you up to meet any
challenges, and welcome any positive changes, in the best way. # What
information to collect?

When you have clarified the main goal for the project, the next step is
to think through carefully what data you want to collect or create. This
will not just be dependent upon the final goal, but also on other
factors such as the time and funding available, the security situation,
and any legal guidelines. So it may be a good idea to read this section
again after reading the “What are your parameters” section.

Depending on your needs and capacity you may find that the default
configuration and categories that come with Mapeo do the job well
enough, or you might want to set up a custom configuration with your own
icons and questions tailored to your specific needs. For more on how to
do this, see creating-custom-configurations. Perhaps, if your project is
new and you are still figuring out what is needed, you may want to start
collecting data using the default configurations, and learn from that
process about what categories and questions you really need.

The simple answer to the question of what information to collect is
probably quite obvious from your goal, but when you dig down the answer
isn’t always that easy. So if you need a territory map for a land claim
then you probably need to collect information about territory use, as
well as the territory boundaries or limits - but exactly what
information do you need, what format should it be in, how much detail do
you need, etc. And if you want to collect evidence of illegal gold
mining, then you may want to collect georeferenced photos and answer a
series of questions about the scale and nature of any impacts found, but
what is the best way of framing questions to get you the answers your
community and perhaps legal team need to evaluate what is going on and
how to take action, and what should you be taking photos of exactly?

Collecting data can be a time-consuming and expensive process, and can
raise expectations about outcomes. So thinking this through carefully in
advance will help ensure you are a) not wasting your own or others time
and resources collecting information that isn’t going to be useful and
b) not in the situation where you realize at the end of a month-long
trip that you need to go back to all the places again because you forgot
to collect a crucial bit of data.

Think about the following questions to further clarify exactly what data
you should be gathering and how to set up any custom configurations:

-   First think about your goal and what you know of your needs.
    Brainstorm with any other team members or with the community about
    all the possible things you could collect information about,
    categories and questions, and then start organizing and refining.
-   If possible do some research by talking to allies, or looking online
    to see how other similar projects were set up and what data they
    collected.
-   Are there any rules, restrictions or guidelines that might determine
    the kind of information you collect and how to ensure it is usable.
    For example some governments/authorities might require data to be
    collected in a particular GPS format, or follow a particular
    information template, in order to be accepted or easily acted upon.
-   Might the data need to be used in a legal process, if so there may
    be specific ways of collecting it, or additional questions you ask,
    which will enable it to be used more effectively. If possible get
    local legal advice about this, as it will differ depending on the
    type of data and the country you are in.
-   Knowing how much information is too much. Once you start making a
    map or collecting information it quite fun… maybe a little too fun
    🙂. If you have all the time in the world then this may not be a
    problem, but if people or lands are being threatened you may need to
    make compromises in terms limiting the data you collect to that
    which is urgently needed. # Data types within Mapeo

In terms of data types, Mapeo Mobile can collect:

-   GPS points: so you can georeference particular points and places,
    and gather data associated with them. When saving a GPS point in
    Mapeo Mobile you need to categorize it with an icon.
-   Photographs: photographs get tagged with the GPS point of their
    particular location - is this right? - as well as being attached to
    the place they are associated with.
-   Details fields: if you set up a custom configuration you can add any
    number of questions into Mapeo so that you could carry out household
    surveys, collect quantitative information or evidence, or likewise
    write down detailed stories. Your questions can be text fields for
    open descriptions; select one or select many. ****

Mapeo Desktop can display and manage the above data types and
additionally you can create georeferenced points, lines and areas with a
basemap in the background. These data types can similarly have questions
or fields associated with them that you fill in, and which can then be
used for analysis. # 📱 Mapeo Mobile installation & setup

In this section, you will find all the needed resources to learn how to
install and set up Mapeo Mobile:

-   installing-mapeo-mobile.md
-   app-settings.md
    -   Language
    -   GPS coordinate format
-   importing-configurations.md
-   adding-custom-base-maps-to-mapeo-mobile.md
-   updating-mapeo-mobile.md

Before you start, make sure that:

-   The battery of the smartphone is charged and/or you have access to a
    charger and an electrical outlet or portable battery.
-   The smartphone is virus-free.

{% hint style=“warning” %} Mapeo Mobile is currently available for
Android only and works on Android version 5.0 or above. {% endhint %} #
Updating Mapeo Mobile

Like most existing apps, Mapeo Mobile is in continuous development. We
frequently release new versions of the application to fix technical
issues or add new functionality. When you update Mapeo Mobile, you do
not lose data you have collected or synchronized using a previous
version.

The process to update Mapeo Mobile is very similar to the installation
process and there are 3 ways to do it:

-   Update from Play Store
    If you have an internet connection, update to the latest version of
    Mapeo Mobile from the Google Play Store. The steps are the same as
    for installing Mapeo: #install-from-play-store

-   Update from an APK file
    To update Mapeo Mobile on smartphones that have no internet
    connection, follow the same steps as for installing the app using an
    installation file (.apk), this time using a more recent installation
    file: #install-from-apk-file

-   ****Update via P2P App Updates (*Experimental)
    Mapeo Mobile currently includes an experimental feature that allows
    you to update the version of the application offline via a
    peer-to-peer connection over Wi-Fi. For more on how to update this
    way, see#updating-mapeo-mobile-via-p2p-peer-to-peer-app-updates

{% hint style=“info” %} To update files used within Mapeo Mobile, such
as configurations or background maps, follow the same steps detailed in
the sections below using the new files:
importing-configurations.mdadding-custom-base-maps-to-mapeo-mobile.md {%
endhint %}

Other content related to Mapeo updates

-   #mapeo-versions-information-and-naming-conventions
-   #installation-files-for-older-versions-of-mapeo-mobile

Mapeo versions - information and naming conventions

Mapeo uses a numerical system to name versions ( for example v.5.4.0).
The numbers are labeled as follows: v.MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH.

-   The MAJOR number indicates a breaking change - a change in this
    number could be related to how the software work or a change in how
    you use it. The MAJOR number increases if features that were
    previously part of the app are now removed.
-   The MINOR number increases when new features have been added to
    Mapeo.
-   The PACTH number increases if there are small updates or fixes that
    don’t introduce any new behavior or features.

If the MAJOR number increases, the MINOR and PATCH numbers are reset to
0. If the MINOR number increases, the PATH number is reset to 0.

{% hint style=“info” %} To identify which version is more recent,
compare the version numbers (excluding the dots between digits). The
bigger the number is, the newer the version is. For example, Mapeo
v.5.4.0 is newer than Mapeo v.5.3.2, because 540 is a bigger number than
532. {% endhint %}

Installation files for older versions of Mapeo Mobile

To view all previous versions of Mapeo Mobile, including release notes
for changes made in each version, see the Mapeo Mobile Releases page on
GitHub.

Updating Mapeo Mobile via P2P (peer-to-peer) App Updates

Peer-to-peer (P2P) App Updates is an experimental feature that allows
you to share and receive newer versions of the Mapeo app by connecting
to other Mapeo devices via Wi-Fi (no internet connection required).

When updating the Mapeo app version in this way, NONE of your Mapeo data
(observations, configurations, or maps) is shared between devices.

For step-by-step instructions on using P2P App Updates, see:
p2p-peer-to-peer-app-updates.md # Adding custom background maps to Mapeo
Mobile

By default, Mapeo Mobile uses abackground **** map that shows some
geographic elements such as rivers and mountains, as well as some
political and urban elements such as borders, cities, roads, etc.

If you have a custom background map prepared, you can add it and use it
in Mapeo Mobile without affecting the data you have collected. (For more
on creating custom background maps, see custom-base-maps.)

{% hint style=“info” %} November 2022 update: We have just added a new
experimental feature to manage multiple background maps, as part of a
greater effort to simplify the process of generating and adding custom
background maps to Mapeo.
For more on how to test this feature, see: background-maps.md. {%
endhint %}

{% hint style=“warning” %} Adding a background map to Mapeo currently
requires navigating the File Manager on your smartphone and copy-pasting
elements in the internal file system. A mistake in this process could
cause irreversible undesired effects. {% endhint %}

-   ****************Using a computer, a USB cable, and your
    smartphone****

Adding a background map using a computer

Connect your smartphone to a computer

Unlock the screen of the smartphone and connect the device to a computer
using a USB cable. Tap the Charging this device via USB notification.
Under “Use USB for,” select File Transfer.

{% hint style=“info” %} On Mac computers, you will need to have Android
File Transfer installed to view and transfer files to your Android
phone. {% endhint %}

{% hint style=“warning” %} For troubleshooting with transferring files
to your Android device from a computer, see the Android Help page here.
{% endhint %}

On your computer, locate and copy the contents of the Mapeo background map package

Mapeo background maps will often be shared as a compressed file(.zip).
If your background map is a .zip file, double-click the file to unzip
it.

A Mapeo background map consists of several folders and files that need
to be copied into the file system of Mapeo Mobile. Standard vector
background maps for Mapeo will contain the file elements listed below -
3 folders and 2 files.

{% hint style=“info” %} Raster background maps will contain different
files and folders than those pictured above. Raster tile background maps
for Mapeo consist of one folder (tiles) and one file (style.json). {%
endhint %}

Select and copy all of the elements found inside your background map
folder.

Paste the background map elements onto your smartphone

Once you have copied the contents of the background map folder, use the
computer to browse through your smartphone to the correct folder within
the Mapeo Mobile file system.

Click on Internal Shared Storage, then on Android, data, com.mapeo. Then
click on files, then on styles, and finally on default. Paste the
background map elements into the default folder.

The complete path of the default folder where you will paste the map
elements is
Internal Shared Storage/Android/data/com.mapeo/files/styles/default

Restart Mapeo Mobile

Restart the Mapeo Mobile app. The new background map will appear on the
home Map screen.

{% hint style=“info” %} Loading a new background map for the first time
in Mapeo Mobile can take several minutes. {% endhint %} # Security

The following features introduce options for further layers of security
to protect Mapeo data:

-   app-passcode.md
-   obscure-passcode.md # App Passcode

App Passcode allows you # Obscure Passcode

P2P (peer-to-peer) App Updates

Peer-to-peer (P2P) App Updates is an experimental feature that allows
you to share and receive newer versions of the Mapeo app by connecting
to other Mapeo devices via Wi-Fi (no internet connection required).

When updating the Mapeo app version in this way, NONE of your Mapeo data
(observations, configurations, or maps) is shared between devices.

To search for and share Mapeo app updates between Mapeo Mobile devices,
both smartphones must:

-   have the P2P App Updates feature enabled
-   have Mapeo open to the Synchronize screen
-   be connected to the same Wi-Fi network

Turn on the P2P App Updates feature

To use this feature, you will need to enable it within the Experiments
menu. To do so, tap the Observations list button, then tap Settings, and
select Experiments. Select P2P App Updates, then check the box to Use
P2P App Updater.

Check for available updates

Once you have enabled the P2P App Updates feature, you will be able to
use it on the Synchronize screen.
To search for and share Mapeo app updates between Mapeo Mobile devices,
both smartphones must have the P2P App Updates feature enabled, have
Mapeo open to the Synchronize screen, and be connected to the same Wi-Fi
network.

If a newer version of the app is available from another Mapeo device on
the network, the update will be automatically downloaded.

(If your device has a newer version than other devices the network, you
will see the message “Sharing app updates with other devices.”)

Install app update

To install the newer version of Mapeo, wait until the download
completes, then tap INSTALL on the Synchronize screen.

Allow installs from Mapeo

After tapping INSTALL, you may see a security pop-up window saying that
your phone is not allowed to install apps from this source.

To enable Mapeo to install updates, tap Settings in the pop-up window
and toggle the switch to Allow from this source in the following Android
Settings screen.

Tap the Back button to return to Mapeo and confirm that you would like
to install the update.

Reopen Mapeo

When the installation is complete, Mapeo will close automatically. When
you re-open Mapeo, you will see an update confirmation window. Tap OK to
close the window and start using the new version of Mapeo.

# Directional Arrow

The new Directional Arrow feature uses your smartphone’s digital compass
to provide information about which direction your phone is facing. Close
proximity to large metal objects or strong magnetic field can affect the
precision of the compass.

If your smartphone doesn’t have a compass, the Directional Arrow may
still be able to determine direction based on movement. Direction based
on movement may be less accurate.

{% hint style=“info” %} NOTE: Directional Arrow is not reliable enough
to be used exclusively for navigation, and it may drain your device
battery faster. {% endhint %}

Turn on Directional Arrow

To activate the Directional Arrow feature:

1.  Click on Observations List, then click on Settings and select
    Experiments.
2.  Select Directional Arrow, then click the checkbox to Use Directional
    Arrow.
3.  Click on Back as many times as necessary to return to the home Map
    screen to view the arrow. # Experiments: Turning on experimental
    features

Experiments

The Experiments screen within the Settings menu contains new,
experimental features that are in ongoing development. They can be
activated and used in their current state and will be improved and moved
out of the Experiments section in future app updates.

The features currently available in Experiments are:

-   ****directional-arrow.md****
-   ****p2p-peer-to-peer-app-updates.md****
-   background-maps.md # Background Maps

Mapeo Mobile 5.5.0 introduces a new Map Manager user interface for
importing and managing multiple background maps. The new experimental
Background Maps feature allows you to add your own custom maps and
switch between multiple maps.

WARNING: When this feature is enabled, you will not have access to the
map you had previously been using in Mapeo. Turn off Map Manager to
switch back to your previous map.

{% hint style=“info” %} For info on how to generate a map file in for
use in the new Background Maps feature, see creating-mbtiles.md {%
endhint %}

{% hint style=“info” %} Instructions on using the new Background Maps
feature coming soon. {% endhint %} # Choosing Mapeo Mobile settings

The following settings can be easily changed in Mapeo Mobile:

-   #language
-   #gps-coordinate-format
-   #experiments (activate experimental features)

Language

Mapeo Mobile is currently available in more than 15 languages, but it
can be translated into any additional language using the Crowdin
platform. For more on translation, see: translating.md

To change the language of Mapeo Mobile:

1.  Click on Observations List, then click on Settings and select
    Language.
2.  On the Language screen, select the language you would like to use
    for Mapeo Mobile. The language of the application will change
    automatically.
3.  To return to the home screen of the application, click on Back as
    many times as necessary.

  ▶ Video available: How to change the language of Mapeo Mobile

GPS coordinate format

Mapeo Mobile supports three GPS coordinate formats: Universal Transverse
Mercator (UTM), Degrees/Minutes/Seconds (DMS), and Decimal Degrees (DD).

To change the coordinate format used:

1.  Click on Observations List, then click on Settings and select
    Coordinate Format.
2.  On the Coordinate Format screen, click on the format you would like
    to use and it will automatically change inside the application.
3.  To return to the home screen of the application, click on Back as
    many times as necessary.

Experiments

The Experiments screen contains new, experimental features that are in
ongoing development.

For more on how to activate and test these features, see
experiments-turning-on-experimental-features

Installing Mapeo Mobile

There are 2 ways to install Mapeo Mobile on your smartphone:

-   Install from Play Store
    If you have an internet connection, you can download and install
    Mapeo Mobile for free from the Google Play Store.
-   Install from a APK file
    To install Mapeo Mobile on smartphones that have no internet
    connection, you can use an installation file (.apk).

Install from Play Store

Before you start, make sure that:

-   You have a good internet connection.
-   You have enough space available on your smartphone for the Mapeo
    application and data you will collect - we recommend that you have
    at least 1 GB (gigabyte) available.

To install Mapeo Mobile on your smartphone from the Google Play Store:

1.  Open the Play Store application on your smartphone.
2.  In the search bar at the top of the Play Store window, type Mapeo,
    and click on the magnifying glass icon at the bottom right of the
    keyboard.
3.  Click Mapeo in the list of applications.
4.  On the Mapeo Mobile screen in the Play Store application, click on
    Install.
5.  When the installation process is complete, click on Open.
6.  When Mapeo Mobile opens, you will be prompted to allow Mapeo access
    to your phone’s camera and GPS for proper functioning of the app.
    After that, the Mapeo Mobile home screen will open automatically.

{% hint style=“info” %} The installation process can take a long time
(more than 15 min), depending on the quality of your internet
connection. {% endhint %}

{% hint style=“warning” %} If you don’t have enough space available on
your smartphone, you will receive a message from Play Store inviting you
to delete content or applications from your device to free up space. {%
endhint %}

  ▶ Video available: How to install Mapeo Mobile from Play Store

Install from APK file

You can install Mapeo Mobile on a smartphone that does not have an
internet connection using a previously downloaded installation file
(.apk).

If you already have the installation file on your device, continue here:
#install-from-an-apk-file.

Download the installation file

While an internet connection is available, download the Mapeo
installation file(.apk).

{% hint style=“info” %} Once downloaded, the APK file can be shared with
other devices and used to install Mapeo offline.

-   If you have an internet connection, use any messaging app (such as
    Telegram or WhatsApp) for sending installation files (.apk) between
    smartphones.
-   If you have no internet connection, you can copy the file from a
    computer using a USB cable or send the installation file using
    Bluetooth. Read more about how to send a file using these methods in
    sharing-files-between-devices.md. {% endhint %}

Install from APK file

1.  Locate the Mapeo installation file (.apk) on the device.
2.  Tap on the installation file (.apk) to open it.
3.  In the pop-up window, click on INSTALL. The installation process may
    take several minutes.
4.  Once the installation is complete, click on OPEN in the pop-up
    window.
5.  When Mapeo Mobile opens, you will be prompted to allow Mapeo access
    to your phone’s camera and GPS for proper functioning of the app.
    After that, the Mapeo Mobile home screen will open automatically.

  ▶ Video available: How to install Mapeo Mobile from an APK file #
  Importing configurations into Mapeo Mobile

To start using a custom configuration, you’ll need to import the new
configuration file into Mapeo Mobile. For more on configurations, see
custom-configurations.

Locate the configuration file

Download or copy the configuration file (eg.
example_project.mapeosettings) onto your Android device. Note which
folder the file was saved in.

{% hint style=“info” %} For sending configuration files (.mapeosettings)
between smartphones with an internet connection, we recommend using the
Telegram app, as other messaging applications have problems with this
file format.

If you don’t have an internet connection, you can copy the file from a
computer using a USB cable or send the file using Bluetooth. Read more
about how to send a file using these methods in
sharing-files-between-devices.md. {% endhint %}

Go to Settings

In the Mapeo Mobile app, tap the Observations list button, then the
Settings button.

Import configuration file

Select Project configuration, then tap Import config.

Navigate to the folder that contains your configuration file and tap on
the file.

{% hint style=“info” %} Files downloaded from the internet or a
messaging application can generally be found in the Downloads folder. {%
endhint %}

Confirm import

Click OK on the import confirmation window and verify that the Project
configuration screen now displays the name of the new configuration.

To start using the updated configuration, tap Back as many times as
needed to return to the home screen and tap Create observation. The
Categories screen will now display the icons and category names of your
custom configuration.

  ▶ Video available: How to identify which configuration is Mapeo Mobile
  using

  ▶ Video available: How to import a custom configuration to Mapeo
  Mobile # 💻 Mapeo Desktop use

Mapeo Desktop is a computer application that can be used for two
different purposes:

-   using-mapeo-desktop-to-manage-mapeo-mobile-data
    Mapeo Desktop allows you to aggregate, view, and manage data
    collected with Mapeo Mobile. Observations mode offers options to
    filter and export data into multiple formats, such as GeoJSON, CSV,
    and PDF, and also allows the publication of online interactive maps
    containing data collected with Mapeo Mobile.

-   using-mapeo-desktop-to-create-territory-information
    Mapeo Desktop also offers an interface for adding or creating
    territory data directly within the Desktop application. Territory
    mode provides a basic toolkit for mapping features that are more
    accessible to new tech users than other available geographic
    information systems (GIS) tools. It also offers the option to import
    geographic information from an external source, and export map data
    in a .GeoJSON file format. Further manipulation or visualization of
    exported map data requires knowledge of other software. # Creating
    and editing territory data

We use the word features to describe things that appear on the map, such
as rivers, buildings, or points of interest. In Territory mode, you can
create features in the form of points, lines and areas by drawing these
directly on a background map.

-   Points are features associated with a single location (coordinate).
    These could be specific places of interest like a building, place
    name, plant, or rapid.
-   Lines are features associated with a linear path (composed of a set
    of coordinates). Lines are used to represent features such as roads,
    trails, and rivers.
-   Areas are features associated with a bounded area (composed of a set
    of coordinates, and sometimes also called a “polygon”). Areas are
    used to show the boundaries of features like lakes, natural zones,
    and settlement areas.

Zoom in to edit

In order to get started creating features in Territory mode, you first
have to zoom in on the map until you get to a sufficiently high zoom
level at which your data will be precise.

You can either navigate the map using your mouse or keyboard as
described in navigating-around-the-map.md, or you can click on the Zoom
in to edit button that will show at the top if you are not yet at a high
enough zoom level. Clicking this button will zoom in the map at the
center of your current view.

Note: if you already have territory data in Mapeo, this data will
disappear from view if you are no longer zoomed in to a level where you
can make edits. It will appear again once you return to a sufficiently
high zoom level. You can also use the Zoom to data feature (located in
the View menu) to zoom to the maximum extent of your data to help find
your way back to your data at a sufficiently high zoom level.

Creating features

Creating point features 

To create a new point feature, click the Point button [or press the 1
key on your keyboard]. This will change the mouse cursor to a cross
symbol. Also, the point button will now be highlighted in blue.

To place the new point on the map, position the mouse cursor where the
point should go, then left-click [or press Space on your keyboard].

Creating line features 

To add a line, click the Line button on the toolbar above the map [or
press the 2 key on the keyboard]. This will change the mouse cursor to a
cross symbol.

Next, position the mouse cursor where the line should begin and
left-click [or press Space on the keyboard] to begin automatically
placing nodes along the line of your mouse. Continue placing more nodes
by clicking on the map [or pressing Space on your keyboard]. While
drawing, you can zoom in or drag the map in order to add more detail.

To finish a line, click again on the last node [or press Enter on your
keyboard].

Creating area features 

To add an area, click the Area button on the toolbar above the map [or
press the 3 key on your keyboard]. This will change the mouse cursor to
a cross symbol.

Next, position the mouse cursor at one of the corners of the feature you
want to create and left-click [or press Space to begin placing nodes
around the outer edge of the area]. Continue placing more nodes by
clicking on the map [or pressing Space in your keyboard]. While drawing,
you can zoom in or drag the map in order to add more detail.

To finish an area, click again on either the first or last node [or
press Enter]. Mapeo will automatically join your last point to your
first point to create a closed area.

Adding a category and details to a feature 

After you create a feature on the map, the Select category panel will
appear on the left, and you will be able to assign a category to the
feature. Scroll down the list of categories to find the right one, or if
you know its name you can search by starting to type its name in the
search box. Recently used categories will appear at the top of the list,
and the others are listed in alphabetical order.

Select the category that best represents what you are documenting in the
feature you are creating. Mapeo comes with a default set of categories
and associated icons that can be used for collecting and classifying
data.

{% hint style=“info” %} It is possible to create custom categories and
icons to tailor Mapeo to your specific data collection needs. This
customization currently requires significant technical knowledge. For
more on customization, see custom-configurations. {% endhint %}

Depending on the category you have selected, you may see specific
questions associated with the category. These could be text fields,
“select one” buttons, or “select multiple” checkboxes. All of these
fields are optional.

{% hint style=“info” %} Depending on the Mapeo configuration you are
using, different types of features may be mapped using the same
category. For example, in the current default configuration of Mapeo,
you can assign the Lake category for both point and area features,
depending on your use case: you may want to create a point dataset of
all the names of lakes across a region, or, you may want to draw the
boundaries of lakes to show them on a cartographic map.

{% endhint %}

After selecting a category and filling in any information you can click
on the :heavy_check_mark: confirm button in the top right of the Select
category panel to stop editing that point. Clicking elsewhere on the map
will also navigate you away from the panel.

To learn more about how data types work in Mapeo configurations, and how
to customize these to meet your own needs, see
creating-custom-configurations.

Viewing and editing a feature 

Select a feature 

Left-click on a feature to select it. This will highlight it with a
pulsing glow, and the Edit feature panel will display details about that
feature.

Right-click on a feature to display the Feature commands menu, which
shows the commands that are available, such as rotating, moving, and
deleting.

Moving points 

To move a point, place the mouse cursor over the point, then press and
hold the left mouse button while dragging the point to its new location.

Moving lines 

To move an entire line, right-click the line and select the Move command
from the Feature commands menu. Then move the mouse, and left-click to
place the line in a new location.

Modifying lines or areas

To adjust the shape of a line or area, first left-click to select it.
All nodes of the feature will be drawn as small circles. You can then
drag the nodes to better locations.

You can also create new nodes along a line or area either by
double-clicking on the line or edge of the area, or by dragging the
small triangles at the midpoints between nodes.

Accessing measurement information for a feature 

It is possible to activate a box of measurement information for a
feature, such as the geometry type (point, line, area), the length or
area, and the coordinates, by pressing Ctrl + I while a feature is
selected.

Deleting features 

To delete a feature (point, line, or area), right-click on the point to
select it and show the Feature commands menu, then use the Delete
command.

Editing feature details 

Once you have selected a feature, you can also edit the feature details,
such as the category and any of the detail fields, shown on the Edit
feature panel left to the map.

To change the category, click on the category that is currently
selected. This will show the same list of categories available when
creating a feature. Select the category that you want to change the
feature to by clicking on one of them.

Undo & Redo 

You can undo any edits to features by clicking the Undo button, and redo
them by clicking the Redo button.

Confirming feature details 

To confirm a feature after adding or editing, simply click on the
:heavy_check_mark:Confirm located at the top right of Edit feature
panel. Note that this will not save the feature in your Territory
database until you go through the next step of
#saving-all-of-your-changes.

Also note that to confirm a new feature, you first need to select a
category (see #adding-a-category-and-details-to-a-feature).

Saving all of your changes 

Click Save to finish your edits and save them permanently to your
computer. You should remember to save your work frequently!

On the Save your edits panel, you’ll have a chance to review what you’ve
done. Mapeo will also perform some basic checks for missing data and may
offer helpful suggestions and warnings if something doesn’t seem right
(for example, if there is any data that is missing a category).

Before saving your changes you must enter a Changeset Comment, or a
short description of the changes you have made. Then click Save so your
changes will be saved on the map, and can be synchronized with other
devices or exported.

Automatic Backups 

If you can’t finish your edits in one sitting, for example if your
computer crashes or you close the browser tab, your edits are still
saved by Mapeo. When you open Mapeo again later and access the Territory
mode, Mapeo will offer to restore your work.

# Changing background maps in Territory mode

The standard background map that appears in Territory mode when you are
connected to the internet is an imagery map provided by Bing, composed
of various sources of satellite imagery and aerial photography.

For territory mapping, high resolution imagery is frequently one of the
best background maps because you can clearly identify features in the
landscape.

There are also other background map options available in the Background
map window, which you can open by clicking on the Background settings
icon or pressing the B key on your keyboard.

You can change your background map at any time while you are adding or
editing features in Territory mode.

Standard background map options 

Some of the standard background maps include:

-   Bing aerial imagery: An excellent source of satellite and aerial
    imagery at low, mid and high resolutions provided by the company
    Bing. Satellite imagery can be helpful for mapping both natural and
    artificial features in many different kinds of landscapes.
-   Esri World Imagery: An alternative imagery layer provided by the
    company Esri, sometimes providing different imagery sources.
-   Mapbox Satellite: Yet another alternative imagery layer provided by
    the company Mapbox; as with the Esri imagery layer, it is possible
    that there are different sources from the other two.
-   OpenStreetMap: A vector map composed of data from the OpenStreetMap
    service. Depending on where you are creating territory mapping data
    and the quality of OpenStreetMap data there, this may be a helpful
    reference for orientation or direct mapping, especially in urban
    settings or anywhere where there is a lot of human infrastructure.
-   OpenTopoMap: a vector map composed of data from OpenStreetMap
    combined with a multi-directional hillshade layer which highlights
    the landscape topography, and can be helpful for mapping features in
    mountainous regions. The available background maps will vary
    depending on your map location in the world. In some countries,
    there will be additional regional maps made available for you to use
    as a map background.

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
    Shown here is the OpenStreetMap background map panned to an area of
                              Manaus, Brazil.

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Shown here is the OpenStreetMap background map panned to an area of
  Manaus, Brazil.

Using a minimap and overlays 

There are several additional options in the Background map window that
may be useful to you:

-   You can enable and disable a Minimap which will show a small-scale
    (more zoomed out) map to give you an overview of your location. This
    minimap will use the same map as the Background map you have
    selected.

-   You can enable and disable Overlays which may add additional layers
    to contextualize your background map. The most useful of these to
    use in conjunction with satellite imagery background maps is the
    Locator Overlay option, which adds administrative boundaries, roads,
    and labels on top of your background map.

Custom background maps 

You can also provide your own custom background map, with the
information most relevant to your project. This can be an online map
source, or a directory composed of offline map tiles. There are two
different ways to do this:

(1) Add a path to your map tiles (typically a directory of files in a
    {z}/{x}/{y}.jpg format, or a singular .asar file) using the Custom
    background option. Map tiles can either be hosted online, or offline
    on your machine, and so the path could either be an online path
    (with an http protocol) or a local file path.

-   To use a map tiles path as a custom background, click on the […]Edit
    custom background button next to the Custom option in the Background
    map window.

-   Then, enter a path in the text field in the pop-up window, click on
    OK and then select the option Custom in the Background map window.

(2) You can also add background map options by specifying them in a
    custom configuration. Learn more about this by visiting
    creating-custom-maps.

{% hint style=“info” %} To learn more about custom and offline maps in
Mapeo, visit creating-custom-maps and
adding-custom-base-maps-to-mapeo-desktop.md. {% endhint %} # Mapeo
Desktop for creating territory data (Territory mode)

This section explores how to use Mapeo Desktop to create, edit and
manage mapping data directly within the Desktop application, using
Territory mode. The information is contained in the following pages:

-   navigating-around-the-map.md
-   creating-and-editing-territory-data.md
-   changing-basemaps.md
-   importing-external-territory-information.md
-   exporting-data.md # Exporting and syncing data

Exporting territory data as a .GeoJSON file 

Once you are finished creating and editing data in Territory mode, you
may export your data to a .GeoJSON file format. This is a commonly used
file format which can be opened using other GIS or cartography software
or platforms such as QGIS, Mapbox Studio, or ArcGIS.

To export territory data, click on the Export map data button on the top
right of your screen, and select Export Territory Data as GeoJSON. Next,
in the pop-up window, rename and save the .GeoJSON file where you want.

{% hint style=“info” %} Note: this will export all of your territory
data at once. There currently is no way to export a selection of your
territory data. {% endhint %}

About synchronizing territory data with other devices

It is possible to synchronize data created using Mapeo Desktop Territory
mode with other devices:

-   If two Mapeo Desktop devices synchronize with each other in the
    Mapeo Desktop Synchronize mode, they will each exchange all of their
    territory data (as well as the observation data) with each other.
-   If a Mapeo Desktop device (computer 1) synchronizes with a Mapeo
    Mobile device (phone 1), then that Mapeo Mobile device will receive
    all of the territory data from the Mapeo Desktop device, and will
    store this data. The Mapeo Mobile device will not display this data
    on the map nor show any of the features in the Observations list
    screen. However:
    -   When this Mapeo Mobile device synchronizes with another Mapeo
        Desktop device (computer 2), it will share all of the territory
        data from that first device (computer 1), and the second device
        will be able to see, edit, export, and synchronize that data as
        well.
    -   When this Mapeo Mobile device (phone 1) synchronizes with
        another Mapeo Mobile device (phone 2), that second device
        (phone 2) will receive all of the territory data that was
        synchronized with the first device (phone 1), but won’t be able
        to see it or edit it. The second Mapeo Mobile device (phone 2)
        may now synchronize this data with other Mapeo devices.

{% hint style=“info” %} Note: Synchronized territory data will also
include any external geospatial data that was added to Mapeo Territory
mode; see importing-external-territory-information.md. {% endhint %}

{% hint style=“info” %} To learn more about how synchronizing data works
in Mapeo, seesynchronizing-data-with-mapeo-desktop.md. {% endhint %} #
Navigating around the map

The background map that appears underneath the territory data is a
vitally important resource for creating features. This map serves as
your primary reference to where features might be located when you are
creating or editing data.

You move around the map by dragging it and by pressing and holding down
the left mouse button and moving the mouse around. You can also use the
↓, ↑, ←, → arrow keys on your keyboard.

You can zoom in or out by scrolling with the mouse wheel or trackpad, or
by clicking the + Zoom in and - Zoom out buttons in the Map controls
menu on the right side of the map. You can also use the + and - keys on
your keyboard.

If your computer provides your geolocation, you can also click on
theShow my Location button to pan to your location on the map.

You can also zoom to a set of geographic coordinates (in decimal
degrees) by accessing the Zoom to Coordinates feature located in the
View menu. Enter a pair of longitude and latitude coordinates separated
by a comma and with longitude going first, and then click Submit. The
background map should travel to the coordinates.

The + Zoom in to edit button appears at the top of your screen when you
are not sufficiently zoomed in. You can press it to zoom in to a minimum
high zoom level where editing is possible. Once you have created
territory data, you can also use the Zoom to Data feature located in the
View menu to zoom to the maximum extent of your territory data on the
map.

Lastly, it is possible to activate an overview map at the top of the
map, by pressing the / key.

You can change the background map used in Territory mode at any time.
For more information on this, visit changing-basemaps.md. # Importing
and using external geospatial data

When creating data in Territory mode, you may want to incorporate or
utilize geospatial data from a source outside of Mapeo Desktop Territory
Mode.

One key source of data that you may want to access in Mapeo Desktop
Territory mode is data that was collected via Mapeo Mobile, synchronized
with your Mapeo Desktop device, and available in Mapeo Desktop
Observations mode.

Additional data sources to use could be any of the following:

-   .GeoJSON (a commonly used format by many GIS tools such as QGIS or
    Mapbox, and also available as an export option in both Mapeo Desktop
    Territory and Observations modes)
-   .kml / .kmz (A file extension used by Google Earth Pro and related
    tools, but commonly used by many applications)
-   Shapefile (.shp and several other files, created by Esri for use in
    their ArcGIS software but commonly used by many applications)
-   .gpx (a GPS data file that contains waypoints, routes, and tracks;
    generated by handheld GPS devices by Garmin and others)

There are currently three different ways to work with the above kinds of
external data.

Importing .GeoJSON or shapefile data as territory data 

You can import a file containing geospatial data (in .GeoJSON and
shapefile formats) directly into your Mapeo Desktop Territory mode
database. This will add all of the data (points, lines, and areas) to
your Mapeo Desktop territory data set as uncategorized features. You can
then edit the features in the same way as any features that were created
directly in Territory mode.

-   In the Top menu bar, click on File and then select Import territory
    data.

-   In the file browser pop-up window, navigate to the directory where
    the file you want to import is located. Select the file you wish to
    import (in either .GeoJSON or shapefile format).

-   Currently, Mapeo does not provide any messaging once you have done
    so, but if the file you have selected has geospatial data that can
    be imported, Mapeo will begin importing the data. You may see a
    processing icon at the bottom right of the map, indicating that data
    is being imported.
-   Upon successful import, the data will not show up right away; you
    may have to reload Mapeo by pressing CTRL-R or restarting.
-   Once imported and refreshed, the data will appear as uncategorized
    features on your map. Remember that you will need to be zoomed in to
    the area where they are located in order to see them on the
    background map.

-   You can then edit the features in the same way as any features that
    were created directly in Territory mode.

{% hint style=“info” %} Note: to import a shapefile, Mapeo Desktop is
configured to look for .shp file. However, a shapefile consists of a
number of additional files with other extensions including .shx, .dbf,
.sbn and several additional optional files. Make sure these files are in
the same directory as your .shp file or the import will fail. {% endhint
%}

{% hint style=“info” %} Note: currently, it is not possible to import
.kml / .kmz or .gpx data directly into your Territory database. See the
next section for more information on how to use these as a map data
overlay. {% endhint %}

Using geospatial data as a temporary custom map data overlay 

You can add geospatial data as a temporary data layer that is displayed
on top of your background, as a reference for creating Territory data
but without including this data directly into your database. This could
be useful if you have some geospatial data that you want to display for
reference when creating data, such as place names, rivers and creeks,
roads and paths, or zonal data. In Territory mode, this is currently
known as custom map data.

There are four types of data that can be added as custom map data: .gpx,
.kml, .geojson and .json.

There are two ways to add custom map data to Territory mode:

(1) Using the Map Data window

-   Click on Map Data [or use the F key shortcut on your keyboard].

-   Click on the […] Edit custom data layer button next to Custom Map
    Data. This button will be grayed out if no custom map data has been
    added.
-   From here, you can click the Choose File button to select a file, or
    add a data file URL if it is hosted on a server.

-   If you are adding a file, in the file browser pop-up window,
    navigate to the directory where the file you want to import is
    located. Select the file you wish to import.

-   Click Ok. Now, you should be able to check the Custom Map Data
    option to show or hide the geospatial data that you’ve added.

(2) You also can drag the files from a file explorer window directly
    onto the map view. This will automatically add the file to the
    Custom Map Data option in the Map Data panel.

On the Territory mode map, custom map data is shown with a pink outline
and fill. If you hover over or click over any custom map data shapes,
you will see attributes of the data in the Edit feature panel.

However, neither the attributes nor the geometries of custom map data
can be edited, as this data is only made available as a visual reference
for creating territory data. If you want to include this data directly
into your territory database, then you need to import the data as
described in #importing-.geojson-or-shapefile-data-as-territory-data(and
if your data is not in either of those formats, you may need to convert
it using another software such as QGIS, ArcGIS, or web-based conversion
tools such as toGeoJSON).

If you are unable to convert the file, then you can create new features
by tracing over these overlain points, lines and areas. If you choose
this route, you should make sure you are very zoomed in when you trace
features to ensure you are as accurate as possible.

About observation data in Territory mode 

While there is a different workflow for working with observation data in
Mapeo that is documented in the
using-mapeo-desktop-to-manage-mapeo-mobile-data section, you can access
Mapeo observation data in the Territory mode as well. Currently, Mapeo
observation data will be displayed in the same style as Territory data.

It is also possible to edit Mapeo observations data in Territory mode,
to a limited degree: you can edit feature details, and these changes
will be reflected in Observation mode, and will also be synchronized
with other Mapeo devices. However, if you move the location of a
feature, or delete a feature in Territory mode, these changes will not
be reflected in Observation mode; and, when you close and open Territory
mode again, moved features will reappear in their original location as
they were in Observation mode, and deleted features will reappear on the
map. # Mapeo Desktop for managing Mapeo Mobile data (Observations mode)

This section explores how to use Mapeo Desktop to view and manage Mapeo
Mobile data, as well as the available options for exporting data into
different formats. The information is contained in the following pages:

-   syncing-data.md
-   viewing-observations.md
-   editing-and-deleting-observations.md
-   exporting-and-sharing-externally.md # Editing and deleting
    observations

Edit observation details

To edit an observation, open its full details in the View observation
window.

{% hint style=“info” %} From Map or Media view, click on a dot or image
to open the View observation window for the associated observation. From
Report view, use the EDIT button in the grey toolbar to open the View
observation window for the observation shown in the current page of the
report. {% endhint %}

With the View observation window open, click on a field to add or edit
information. Click SAVE to save changes.

{% hint style=“info” %} In Mapeo Desktop you cannot modify the creation
date, category type or geographic location of an observation. {% endhint
%}

Delete an observation

To delete an observation, go to the View observation window and click on
theMore options menu. Select Delete observation and confirm deletion by
clicking Yes, delete in the pop-up window.

{% hint style=“danger” %} Deleting observations cannot be undone, so
exercise caution when using delete.

By deleting observations, you will permanently remove them from your
device and all devices you synchronize data with in the future. For more
on synchronization, see peer-to-peer-and-mapeo-sync.md {% endhint %} #
Synchronizing data

To load observations into Mapeo Desktop for the first time, you will
need to synchronize data with another computer or smartphone that uses
Mapeo.

Mapeo allows you to synchronize collected data with other Mapeo users or
devices that are members of the same project. Synchronizing is used
regularly throughout the course of projects to aggregate data collected
by different participants and ensure that multiple copies of the
complete database exist. Syncing data does not always require an
internet connection and can be done in entirely offline areas.

{% hint style=“warning” %} Please note that by synchronizing with
another Mapeo user, ALL DATA is shared in both directions. You will
receive all of the observations present on the other Mapeo device and
they will receive all of the observations present on your device. Only
synchronize with members of your project whom you trust with all of your
data. For more on synchronization, see: peer-to-peer-and-mapeo-sync.md.

Any edits that have been made to the data will also be transferred to
the other device during synchronization. For example, if a person
deletes or edits an observation and then syncs with other devices, this
observation will be deleted or edited on all synced devices.

It is important to create project synchronization protocols to ensure
that all data becomes part of the project database. {% endhint %}

There are 2 ways to synchronize with Mapeo Desktop:

-   Synchronization via Wi-Fi ()
    For syncing with another computer or smartphone
    Can be used if both devices are in the same place and have access to
    a Wi-Fi network. (An internet connection is not required.)
-   Synchronization with a file ()
    Only for syncing between computers
    Useful in these two contexts:
    -   If devices are in the same place, even without a Wi-Fi network.
    -   If devices are not in the same place and both have an internet
        connection.

Viewing observations

To view and manage synchronized observations in Mapeo Desktop, click on
Observations in the Mapeo modes panel on the left side of the screen.

Observations mode offers 3 different options for viewing observations in
your database. In the Toolbar, you can choose between the following
views:

-   Map view
-   Media view
-   Report view

Map view

In the default Map view, observations are displayed as dots on a map.
Use your computer’s mouse or the Zoom controls at the top right of the
map to zoom in and zoom out and navigate to different locations on the
map.

Hover your mouse over an individual dot on the map to preview the
associated observation. Click on a dot to view the full details of that
observation in the View observation window. Click on the Expand button
to view all fields in each section.

Media view

To view observations as a gallery of images, click on Media in the
Toolbar. Click on an individual image to view the details of that
observation in the View observation window.

Report view

To view observations in the form of a report, click on Report in the
Toolbar. Report view displays one observation per page and includes the
category, coordinates, date, a map of the location, and any images
associated with the observation.

Use the Next and Previous buttons at the bottom of the screen to step
through each page of the report.

You can filter observations included in the report using the Filter
panel, and hide additional data fields using the Hide fields controls in
the grey panel above the report.

{% hint style=“info” %} For more on how to hide fields and save a
report, see#save-as-pdf-report. {% endhint %}

Filter observations

To look at a subset of your observations in Map, Media or Report view,
use the Filter panel. Observations can be filtered by date, category,
and some details fields used to collect the data.

To apply a filter, click the Expand button beside the desired filter
section and adjust the filter criteria. Multiple filters can be used at
the same time.

Filter by date

To filter observations by a specific date range, click Expand beside
Date of observation to open the filter section. Click on the From and To
date fields and use the pop-up calendar to define the start date and end
date for the timeframe you would like to view. Only observations
collected between these dates will be visible.

Click ALL to reset the filter and show observations for all dates.

Filter by category

To filter observations by a category, click Expand beside Category to
open the list of the categories used in your project.

-   Use the checkboxes to select the categories that you want to make
    visible.
-   Click ONLY to show observations for a single selected category.
-   Click ALL to reset the filter and show observations for all
    categories.

Filter by details field

You may also have the option to filter by some of the details fields
used in your project. Only details that are “select one” fields (ie. you
can only select one of the available answer options) will be available
in the Filter panel.

{% hint style=“info” %} For more on creating custom details fields, see
custom-configurations. {% endhint %} # Synchronizing via Wi-Fi

Synchronizing via Wi-Fi

Mapeo Desktop can synchronize data via Wi-Fi with other computers or
smartphones that use Mapeo. This is a good sync option when devices are
near each other and it works with no internet connection.

Requirements:

-   Both devices need to be connected to the same Wi-Fi network
    For devices to sync, both need to be connected to the same Wi-Fi
    network. This Wi-Fi network does not need to have an internet
    connection.

-   Both devices must be using the same configuration
    ****It is only possible to synchronize with devices that use the
    same configuration. For more on how to import configurations, see
    importing-configurations.md.

To synchronize, follow the steps below:

Connect to Wi-Fi

Connect both Mapeo devices to the same Wi-Fi network. In offline
environments, a local Wi-Fi network can be created using a mobile
wireless router or a third device capable of serving as an offline
hotspot.

{% hint style=“info” %} For more on how to create a local Wi-Fi network
or connect to Wi-Fi, see
creating-local-wi-fi-networks
connecting-to-wi-fi.md {% endhint %}

Enter Synchronize mode

In order to synchronize, both devices must have the Synchronize screen
open.

In Mapeo Desktop: Click on Synchronize in the Mapeo modes panel.

In Mapeo Mobile: Tap the Synchronize button on the home screen.

Devices available for syncing will be listed on the Synchronize screen.

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Synchronize screen of Mapeo Desktop showing an available smartphone for
                                  syncing

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Synchronize screen of Mapeo Desktop showing an available smartphone
  for syncing

{% hint style=“info” %} Remember that in order for a device to appear in
the list, it must be connected to the same Wi-Fi network, have the
Synchronize screen open, and be using the same project configuration.
You can confirm which configuration Mapeo Desktop is currently using by
consulting the white bar at the bottom of the Synchronize screen.
For troubleshooting on this step, see solving-sync-issues. {% endhint %}

Start synchronization

Once available devices appear in the list, confirm the identity of the
device you plan to synchronize with by consulting the unique
identification number on the other user’s device.

{% hint style=“info” %} To see the unique identification number of a
Mapeo Mobile device, check the right side of the navy blue bar on the
Synchronize screen in Mapeo Mobile. {% endhint %}

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Matching the unique ID of a Mapeo Mobile device as it appears on Mapeo
                                  Desktop

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Matching the unique ID of a Mapeo Mobile device as it appears on
  Mapeo Desktop

In Mapeo Desktop, click on the SYNCHRONIZE **** button below the device
name to begin the exchange of data.

{% hint style=“warning” %} Important: Keep the Synchronize screen open
on both devices until the synchronization process is complete. {%
endhint %}

View synced observations

To learn about viewing and managing synchronized data:

-   In Mapeo Desktop, continue to viewing-observations.md
-   In Mapeo Mobile, see #view-synced-observations # Synchronizing with
    a file

While other options allow the synchronization between smartphones and
computers, synchronizing with a file is only possible between computers.

In this option, a sync file is created in Mapeo Desktop on one computer
and then it is used by another computer with Mapeo to exchange data.
During the synchronization, all data contained in the sync file is
transferred to the computer that is syncing with it, and all data in the
Mapeo database of the computer will also be transferred to the sync
file. It uses the same two-way method as synchronization via Wi-Fi. To
learn more about how synchronization works, see
peer-to-peer-and-mapeo-sync.md.

-   If devices are near each other, this is a good sync option when you
    can’t create a local Wi-Fi network. You can instead use a USB drive
    to copy and paste the sync file between different devices. It works
    with no internet connection.
-   If devices are not near each other, this is also a good sync option.
    In this case, you will either need to transport a USB drive to the
    location of the second device or have access to an internet
    connection.

Other requirements:

-   Both devices must be using the same configuration
    ****It is only possible to sync with sync files created by devices
    that use the same configuration. For more on how to import
    configurations,
    seeimporting-configurations.mdimporting-configurations.md.

Create a sync file

1.  Open Mapeo Desktop on computer 1, the computer on which you want to
    create a sync file. The generated sync file will include all the
    Mapeo data from that computer.
2.  Click on Synchronize on the Mapeo modes panel

3. Click on the Create a sync file button and choose the name and
location where the generated file will be saved.

Send or copy the sync file to the second device

There are two options for sharing a sync file:

-   Send sync file via email or file sharing service
    (Requires an internet connection)
-   Copy and paste sync file using a USB drive
    (Works with no internet connection)

Option 1. Send sync file via email or file sharing service

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
     Computer 1 (black) generates sync file and sends it via email to
          Computer 2 (blue). Computer 2 then syncs with the file.

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Computer 1 (black) generates sync file and sends it via email to
  Computer 2 (blue). Computer 2 then syncs with the file.

1.  Locate the generated sync file on computer 1.
2.  In your email app (Gmail, Hotmail, etc.), create a new email and
    attach the sync file. Send it to the user of the computer 2, the
    computer with which you want to sync.
3.  Computer 2 must receive the sync file and save it. It is important
    to remember where has it been saved.

{% hint style=“info” %} If the sync file is too large to be sent by
email, you can use other platforms such as WeTransfer, Google Drive, or
Dropbox. You can send files up to 2GB for free using these apps. {%
endhint %}

Option 2. Copy and paste sync file using a USB drive

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
   Computer 1 (black) generates sync file and transfers it via USB drive
        to Computer 2 (blue). Computer 2 then syncs with the file.

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Computer 1 (black) generates sync file and transfers it via USB
  drive to Computer 2 (blue). Computer 2 then syncs with the file.

-   Connect a USB drive to computer 1, where you generated the sync
    file.
-   Locate the generated sync file on computer 1 and click on it using
    the right button of the mouse. Select Copy.
-   Navigate to the USB drive in the file system. Right-click on the
    location and select Paste to paste the sync file onto the drive.
-   Disconnect the USB drive and connect it to the computer you want to
    sync with ( computer 2).
-   Navigate to the USB drive folder and locate the sync file.
    Right-click on the file and select Copy. Navigate to where you would
    like to save the sync file on computer 2. Right-click on the
    location and select Paste.

Start synchronization

1.  Locate the received or pasted sync file on computer 2, the computer
    you want to sync with.
2.  Open Mapeo Desktop on computer 2.
3.  Click on Synchronize in the Mapeo modes panel.

4. Click on the Sync from a file button and in the pop-up window,
navigate until you find the desired sync file. Then click on it and
click Open.Start synchronization

The synchronization with the file will automatically begin.

{% hint style=“warning” %} Important: Keep the Synchronize screen open
on both devices until the synchronization process is complete. {%
endhint %}

{% hint style=“info” %} When the synchronization is complete, computer 2
and the sync file will have identical copies of the Mapeo database. To
complete a 2-way synchronization between the two computers, repeat the
process to copy the sync file back to computer 1 and use it to Sync from
a file. {% endhint %}

View synced observations

To learn about viewing and managing synchronized data in Mapeo Desktop
Observations mode, continue to:

{% content-ref url=“../viewing-observations.md” %}
viewing-observations.md {% endcontent-ref %} # Exporting data & sharing
externally

This section covers the available options and formats for exporting data
from Observations mode in Mapeo Desktop.

-   Save as PDF report: if you want to download or print a PDF report
    with the observations collected.
-   Export as GeoJSON: if you want to continue working on your data in
    another mapping software (such as QGIS, ArcGIS, and others)
-   Export as CSV: if you want to view and manage your data using a
    spreadsheet in Microsoft Excel, Google Sheets, or other data
    analysis tools.
-   Export as Web Map: if you want to publish an interactive online map
    with the observation data.

 Save as PDF report

In Mapeo Desktop you can view your data as a report. Each page of the
report contains the details of one observation. From the Report view,
you can:

-   Edit the details of the observation on the current report page by
    clicking on EDIT in the grey panel above the report.
-   Control which observations are included in the report using the
    Filters panel. For more on filtering, see #filter-observations.
-   Decide which detail fields you want to show or hide. To do so, click
    on the Hide Fields button in the grey panel above the report and
    toggle on off/on the fields that you want to hide/show. Click on
    SHOW ALL to show all fields and click on HIDE ALL to hide them all.

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
                    Hide Fields options in Report view

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Hide Fields options in Report view

-   To save the report as a PDF, click on Save PDF in the grey panel
    above the report. In the pop-up window, give a name to the PDF file
    and choose where to save it. Once you are done, click on Save. To
    view, share or print the report, locate the saved file on your
    computer and click on it to open it.

 Export as GeoJSON

This is a useful export option if you want to continue working on your
data in another mapping software (such as QGIS, ArcGIS, or others).

To export your observation data as .GeoJSON:

1.  In the Observations mode of Mapeo Desktop, click on Export options
    in the Toolbar on the top right of the Mapeo Desktop window.
2.  Select Export observations…

3. In the Export Observations pop-up window:

-   For the Data format field, select GeoJSON.
-   In the Only filtered data or all data? field, choose if you want the
    exported file to contain only filtered data or all data.
-   In the Also export photos? field, choose between including no
    photos, full-size photos, or preview-size photos in the exported
    file.

4. Click on SAVE.

5. In the pop-up window, give a name to the .GeoJSON file and choose
where to save it. Once you are done, click on Save.

You can now load and use this file in mapping software.

 Export as CSV

This is a useful export option if you want to view and manage your data
using a spreadsheet and doing graphs and statistic analysis in software
such as Microsoft Excel, Google Sheets, and others.

To export your observation data as .csv:

1.  In the Observations mode of Mapeo Desktop, click on theExport
    Observation Data menu at the top right corner of the screen.
2.  Select Export observations…

3. In the Export Observations pop-up window:

-   For the Data format field, select CSV.
-   In the Only filtered data or all data? field, choose if you want the
    exported file to contain only filtered data or all data.
-   In the Also export photos? field, choose between including no
    photos, full-size photos, or preview-size photos in the exported
    file.

4. Click on SAVE.

5. In the pop-up window, give a name to the .csv file and choose where
to save it. Once you are done, click on Save.

You can now load and use this file in other software.

 Export as Web Map

This is a useful export option if you want to publish an interactive
online map with the observation data. To export observation data to a
Web Map:

Create a Mapeo Web Package file

1.  In the Observations mode of Mapeo Desktop, on the toolbar, click on
    Export options.
2.  Select Export Webmap…
3.  In the pop-up window, give a title and a description to the map and
    click on SAVE.

4. In the pop-up window, give a name to the Mapeo Web Package
(.mapeomap) file and choose where to save it. Once you are done, click
on SAVE.

Publish your map online

1.  Go to the website maps.mapeo.app and sign in or sign up. It’s free
    and you only need an e-mail account and a password.
2.  Click on + ADD MAP.

3. In the pop-up window, navigate in your computer’s file system to
locate the Mapeo Web Package (.mapeomap) file. Select it and click on
Open. Wait until the uploading process is complete.

4. Click on Publish link to Map to open the website with your published
map!

5. Copy the URL link of the online map to share it with other people

You can also:

-   Click on Edit map details to edit the title, description, terms &
    limitations, and style of the background map.
-   Click on Menu to delete the map.

​# Synchronizing data with Mapeo Desktop

Mapeo Desktop allows you to synchronize collected data with other Mapeo
users or devices that are members of the same project. Synchronizing is
used regularly throughout the course of projects to aggregate data
collected by different participants and ensure that multiple copies of
the complete database exist. Syncing data does not always require an
internet connection and can be done in entirely offline areas.

{% hint style=“warning” %} Please note that by synchronizing with
another Mapeo user, ALL DATA is shared in both directions. You will
receive all of the observations present on the other Mapeo device and
they will receive all of the observations present on your device. Only
synchronize with members of your project whom you trust with all of your
data. For more on synchronization, see: peer-to-peer-and-mapeo-sync.md.

Any edits that have been made to the data will also be transferred to
the other device during synchronization. For example, if a person
deletes or edits an observation and then syncs with other devices, this
observation will be deleted or edited on all synced devices.

It is important to create project synchronization protocols to ensure
that all data becomes part of the project database. {% endhint %}

There are 2 ways to synchronize with Mapeo Desktop:

-   ****Synchronization via Wi-Fi **** ()
    ****For syncing with another computer or smartphone
    ****Can be used if both devices are in the same place and have
    access to a Wi-Fi network. (An internet connection is not required.)

-   ****Synchronization with a file **** ()
    Only for syncing between computers
    Useful in these two contexts:

    -   If devices are in the same place, even without a Wi-Fi network.
    -   If devices are not in the same place and both have an internet
        connection. # Default background map

About background maps 

Mapeo uses background maps to show users their current location in the
mobile app and as a background for displaying data collected or created
with Mapeo.

Mapeo’s default background map 

By default, when the device has access to the internet, Mapeo Mobile and
Mapeo Desktop in Observations mode use a detailed background map that
includes geographic elements such as rivers and mountains, as well as
some political and urban elements such as borders, cities, roads, and
others.

If the device is not connected to the internet, the background map shown
by default is much less detailed. In Mapeo Mobile, the offline
background map shows country borders and the main water bodies. In Mapeo
Desktop, there is currently no default offline background map.

Online background map example:

****
Offline background map example:

Beyond the default background map

Mapeo offers the option to add a custom background map for use both
offline and online. For more on creating and adding custom background
maps, see custom-base-maps. # ✔ Will Mapeo work out-of-the-box for me?

When you install Mapeo, it comes with default options that can be used
right away, without any customization. In the following pages, this
section details what is automatically included with Mapeo so you can
determine whether the app will meet your needs out-of-the-box.

-   default-configuration.md
-   default-base-map.md

Mapeo offers many options for customizing categories, icons, questions
and background maps but the current customization process requires
significant technical knowledge and will not be accessible to all users.

{% hint style=“info” %} For more on customization, see the following
section on customization-options. {% endhint %}

Default configuration

About configurations

Mapeo uses configurations to determine which categories, icons and
questions users see when they are collecting data. For each data point
collected with Mapeo, users select a category to classify the point, and
may answer questions or respond to prompts to provide more detail about
what is being documented.

Mapeo’s default configuration

When you install Mapeo, it comes with a default configuration that
includes general categories and questions for territory mapping and
monitoring.

Categories

The default configuration includes the following data collection
categories:

Observations that do not fit these categories can always be collected
using the New point category.

Questions

For every data point collected, users can enter a description of what
they are documenting. Default categories also include some additional
optional questions or fields that users may fill out when collecting
data. For example, the category Fishing Site includes the field: Name
(Common name of this place).

To review all fields included in the default configuration, install
Mapeo and explore the Add Details section for each category.

Beyond the default configuration

Mapeo offers the option to create custom configurations to fit the needs
of specific projects. For more information on customization, see
custom-configurations. # 📱 Mapeo Mobile use

This section provides step-by-step guidance on the use of the main
features of Mapeo Mobile:

-   activating-gps-and-viewing-current-location.md
-   creating-observations.md
-   viewing-observations.md
-   editing-and-deleting-observations.md
-   sharing-data-externally.md
-   wifi-sync.md

{% hint style=“info” %} If you don’t yet have Mapeo Mobile installed on
your smartphone, see: mapeo-mobile-installation-setup {% endhint %} #
Activating GPS and viewing current location

Enable GPS on your device

Mapeo Mobile uses the GPS of your device, so before you start using the
application make sure that GPS or Location on your smartphone is
enabled.

It will be different on each smartphone, but GPS or Location services
can generally be found in the Quick Settings menu, which can be accessed
by swiping down from the top of your screen.

Confirm GPS access in Mapeo Mobile

On the home screen of Mapeo Mobile, you will be able to see if Mapeo is
successfully accessing your device’s GPS.

-   If GPS is activated, the GPS details button at the top of the screen
    will show a green dot and the precision of the GPS signal:
-   If the GPS is deactivated, the GPS details button will be red:

{% hint style=“info” %} If you activate the GPS on your device while you
are using Mapeo, you might have to restart Mapeo for the app to
recognize that the GPS is activated and change the status of the GPS
details button. {% endhint %}

{% hint style=“danger” %} If you didn’t allow Mapeo Mobile access to
your phone’s camera and GPS the first time you opened Mapeo, you won’t
be able to use GPS information or include pictures in your collected
data. For more on modifying app permissions, see
updating-mapeo-mobile-permissions.md. {% endhint %}

View GPS details in Mapeo Mobile

Tap the GPS details button to see more information on your current
location.

Viewing your current location

By default, Mapeo Mobile will mark your current position with a blue dot
at the center of the map and adjust the map as you move.

If you pan to a different area on the map, you can always return to
viewing your current location by tapping the Show my current position
button on the bottom right of the map.

# Editing and deleting observations

Edit details

Select the observation you would like to edit and open it. You can open
the observation by tapping on the dot marking the observation on the
home Map screen:

or by tapping the observation on the Observations list screen:

Once you are on the View observation screen, tap Edit observation to
modify the information collected.

In the Edit observation screen, you can change the category of the
point, edit the description and details, or add additional photos.

{% hint style=“info” %} In Mapeo Mobile, you can only edit or delete
observations that have been created on your device. You cannot change
the geographic location saved with the observation or the date and time
of the original observation. {% endhint %}

Save changes

Tap Save to save the changes you have made. Tap Back to return the Map
view.

To exit without saving your changes, tap Back and confirm you want to
discard changes.

Delete observations

To delete an observation you have collected, scroll to the bottom of the
View observation screen and tap Delete.

{% hint style=“info” %} In Mapeo Mobile, you can only delete
observations that have been created on your device. {% endhint %}

{% hint style=“danger” %} Deleting observations cannot be undone, so
exercise caution when using delete.

As Mapeo uses a peer-to-peer database, all data is stored directly on
your device and there is no backup on a centralized server. By deleting
observations, you will permanently remove them from your device and all
devices you synchronize data with in the future.
For more on synchronization, see peer-to-peer-and-mapeo-sync.md {%
endhint %} # Viewing observations

Once you have created one or more observations, you can view the data
you have collected on the home Map screen or in a list.

View observations on the map

On the home Map screen of Mapeo Mobile, each observation you collect
will be marked on the map with an orange dot.

{% hint style=“info” %} Note that observations you have just collected
may appear directly below the blue dot marking your current location.
Zoom in on the map to view better {% endhint %}

To view the details of an observation, tap on the orange dot marking the
observation to open the View observation screen.

{% hint style=“info” %} If you have collected several observations in a
small geographic area, you may need to zoom in on the map to see the
different points. {% endhint %}

View observations in a list

Tap Observations list on the home screen to view your observations in
list form.

To view the details of an observation, tap on any observation in the
list to open the View observation screen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Sharing data externally

In Mapeo Mobile, you can share the details of a single observation
(location, images, description, and details) with a contact outside of
Mapeo by using the Share observation feature. Share uses the
communication apps you have installed on your phone (email, WhatsApp,
Signal, Telegram, or others) to send information.

{% hint style=“info” %} Remember that communication apps will require an
internet connection or cell signal to work. {% endhint %}

Open the View observation screen for the selected observation and tap
Share, which is located at the bottom left of the screen.

Select the desired sharing app and enter the contact’s information.
WhatsApp, Signal and Gmail are the apps that currently work best for
sharing Mapeo observations.

{% hint style=“warning” %} Always exercise caution when sharing data
collected, as observations could include sensitive information about
locations, activities, or natural resources. Prior to sharing any data,
think through basic security precautions.

For more on risk assessment and security concerns, see
security-and-risk-assessment.md {% endhint %} # Syncing data via Wi-Fi

About Mapeo Sync

Mapeo Mobile allows you to synchronize the data you have collected with
other Mapeo users that are members of the same project. Syncing data
does not require an internet connection and can be done in entirely
offline areas.

For devices to sync, both need to be in the same place and connected to
the same Wi-Fi network. This Wi-Fi network does not need to have an
internet connection. In offline environments, a local WiFi network can
be created using a mobile wireless router, or by creating a hotspot
using a third smartphone.

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
   In offline environments, you can create a local WiFi network (without
                 internet) using a mobile wireless router.

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

  : In offline environments, you can create a local WiFi network
  (without internet) using a mobile wireless router.

{% hint style=“warning” %} Please note that by synchronizing with
another Mapeo user, ALL DATA is shared in both directions. You will
receive all of the observations created by that user and they will
receive all of your observations. Only synchronize with members of your
project whom you trust with all of your data. For more about this
process, see peer-to-peer-and-mapeo-sync.md.

All edits that have been made to collected data will also be transferred
to the other device during sync. For example, if a person deletes or
edits an observation and then syncs with other devices, this observation
will be deleted or edited on all synced devices. If multiple users edit
the same observation before syncing with each other, the changes that
will prevail after syncing are the newest ones. If you encounter
difficulties with this, see solving-sync-issues.

It is important to create project synchronization protocols to ensure
that all data becomes part of the project database. For more on that,
see creating-user-protocols.md. {% endhint %}

Connect to WiFi

Connect both devices to the same Wi-Fi network. Wi-Fi settings can
generally be found in the Quick Settings menu, which can be accessed by
swiping down from the top of your screen.

{% hint style=“info” %} For more on how to connect to Wi-Fi, see
#connect-to-wi-fi-on-a-smartphone. {% endhint %}

{% hint style=“info” %} For more on how to create a local Wi-Fi network,
see creating-local-wi-fi-networks {% endhint %}

Enter Synchronize mode

Tap the Synchronize button on the Mapeo home screen of both devices to
go to the Synchronize screen.

The Synchronize screen will show whether you are connected to a Wi-Fi
network. If connected, you will be able to see the name of the network
you are connected to in the top left of the navy blue bar. You will also
be able to see the unique identification number of your device on the
right side of the navy bar.

Devices available for synchronization will be listed below.
​[]​

{% hint style=“info” %} Remember that in order for a device to appear in
the list, it must be connected to the same network, have the Synchronize
screen open, and be using the same project configuration. For
troubleshooting on this step, see solving-sync-issues. {% endhint %}

Synchronize data

Once available devices appear in the list, confirm the identity of the
device you plan to synchronize with by consulting the unique
identification number on the other user’s phone.

Click on the Sync button beside the device name to begin the exchange of
data.

{% hint style=“warning” %} IMPORTANT: Keep the Synchronize screen open
on BOTH devices until the synchronization is complete. Interrupting the
sync process can result in permanently corrupted data. {% endhint %}

View synced observations

You can view new observation data received in the synchronization by
looking at the points on the home Map screen or at the Observations list
screen.

In the Observations list screen, observations collected by other devices
will appear with a blue bar on the left side.

{% hint style=“info” %} In Mapeo Mobile, you cannot edit or delete
observations collected by other users.
Remember that you can always view, edit and manage collected data in
Mapeo Desktop. For more on that, see:
using-mapeo-desktop-to-manage-mapeo-mobile-data {% endhint %} # Creating
observations

You collect data with Mapeo Mobile in the form of observations. An
observation is based on a geographic location (a point on the map) and
can have associated photos, notes, and details.

Create a new observation

To create a new observation, tap the Create observation button.

{% hint style=“info” %} Observations can be created from the home Map
screen or from the Camera screen. Tap Camera at the bottom of the home
screen to change the view. {% endhint %}

Select a category

Select the category that best represents what you are documenting in the
observation. Mapeo comes with a default set of categories and associated
icons that can be used for collecting and classifying data.

{% hint style=“info” %} It is possible to create custom categories and
icons to tailor Mapeo to specific data collection needs. This
customization currently requires significant technical knowledge. For
more on customization, see custom-configurations. {% endhint %}

Add a description

Tap on the placeholder What is happening here? to add a description of
what you are documenting.

Add photos

Tap Add Photo to take one or more photos to attach to the observation.

{% hint style=“info” %} Photos must be taken in the moment using your
phone’s camera. Mapeo Mobile does not currently allow you to attach
existing images from a gallery or other source. {% endhint %}

To remove a photo from a draft observation, tap on the thumbnail of the
image. On the View image screen, tap the Delete Image button.

{% hint style=“info” %} If the Delete Image button is not visible on the
View image screen, tap anywhere on the screen to show.
*Deleting images from draft observations is only available in Mapeo
Mobile version 5.4.0 or higher. {% endhint %}

To confirm deletion, tap Delete Image in the confirmation window. Please
note that once deleted, images cannot be recovered.

If you don’t wish to proceed with the deletion, tap Cancel then tap the
Close button to return to the New observation screen.

{% hint style=“info” %} Images cannot be removed once an observation has
been saved. {% endhint %}

Add details

Depending on the category you have selected, you may see the option to
Add details at the bottom of the screen. Observation details consist of
specific questions for each observation category. Mapeo Mobile comes
with basic questions for some categories. Adding details is not required
when creating observations.

Tap NEXT to move to the next question and tap DONE once you have
answered the last one.

{% hint style=“info” %} In order to set up your own custom questions or
details fields, you must customize Mapeo. For more information, see
custom-configurations {% endhint %}

Save observation

Once you have added all desired information, tap Save.

* Note on GPS precision

If the GPS signal at the moment of saving the observation has an
accuracy worse than ± 10 m, Mapeo will automatically offer you three
options:

1.  Tap CONTINUE WAITING to wait until the GPS signal improves.
2.  Tap SAVE to use the current GPS data, even if the accuracy is worse
    than ± 10 m.
3.  Tap MANUAL COORDS to manually enter the coordinates that you want to
    use.
    You can choose which GPS data format you want to use to enter the
    coordinates. This is a useful option if you have a GPS device or
    another smartphone with a better GPS signal accuracy.
    Tap Save once you have manually entered the coordinates to return to
    the Edit observation screen. # Sharing files between devices

See the sections below for different file sharing options:

-   Sharing files between devices with an internet connection
-   Sharing files between devices with no internet connection

Sharing files between devices with an internet connection

If you have access to an internet connection, you can share files in
multiple ways. The optimal way depends on the size and type of the file.
Below are our recommendations:

-   From a smartphone
-   From a computer

 FROM A SMARTPHONE

Some Mapeo files can be tricky to share from a Mapeo Mobile smartphone,
because of their special formats. We recommend using Telegram app,
email, or Google Drive to share the following files:

-   Configuration files (.mapeosettings)
-   Installation files for Mapeo Mobile (.apk)
-   Base maps (folder .zip)

To share and add base maps to Mapeo Mobile, we recommend using a
computer and a USB cable, because it requires navigation inside the file
system of the smartphone and pasting the base map elements in a specific
location. For instructions on that process, see
adding-custom-base-maps-to-mapeo-mobile.md
You can also share larger files (up to 2GB) for free via Dropbox,
WeTransfer, or other online platforms.

{% hint style=“info” %} Sending installation (.apk) and configuration
(.mapeosettings) files with other apps encounter problems with the size
and type of the files. {% endhint %}

 FROM A COMPUTER

These are the most common Mapeo files that you will want to share from a
Mapeo Desktop computer:

-   Configuration files (.mapeosettings)
-   Installation files for Mapeo Desktop (.exe, .dmg , .zip , .AppImage)
-   Base map folders
-   Sync files (.mapeodata)

You can use multiple platforms to share files.

-   We recommend using email apps such as Gmail or Hotmail for sharing
    lightweight files (smaller than 10MB).
-   We recommend using Drive, Dropbox, WeTransfer to share heavier files
    as they allow you to send up to 2GB for free. You can use the
    Telegram Desktop app to send up to 1.5GB.

Sharing files between devices with no internet connection

If you do not have access to an internet connection, there are multiple
ways to share files between devices.

-   Copy and paste files using a USB drive or cable (this is easier to
    do if you have a computer)
-   Send via Bluetooth, SHAREit or other apps

USING A USB CABLE/DRIVE

For transferring files between computers without an internet connection,
we recommend using a USB drive or a cable. Although most computers can
also share files via Bluetoothwith other devices that are nearby,
commonly shared files for Mapeo Desktop can be very heavy (e.g. Sync
files (.mapeodata)) and Bluetooth could take much longer than using a
USB cable or drive.

Example: In this example, we will share a Mapeo installation file from
one computer to another one completely offline, using a USB drive.

[]

1. Connect a ​USB stick to the ​computer where you already have the
installation file and open it.

2. Localize the ​installation file on the ​computer, click on it with the
right button of the mouse, select Copy.

3. Use the right button of the mouse to Paste the previously copied
installation file into your ​USB stick folder.

4. Disconnect the ​USB stick from ​the computer and connect it to the
​computer in which you want to install Mapeo Desktop.

6. Open the USB stick folder and localize the previously pasted
​installation file. Click on it with the right button of the mouse and
select Copy.

7. On the desktop screen of the ​computer in which you want to install
Mapeo Desktop, click on an empty space with the right button of the
mouse and select Paste.

 USING BLUETOOTH

Android devices that are near each other can use Bluetooth to transfer
files without an internet connection. The Bluetooth transfer will be
quicker for lighter weight files, such as:

-   Configuration files (.mapeosettings)
-   Installation files for Mapeo Mobile (.apk)

To transfer files using Android’s Bluetooth:

1.  Activate Bluetooth on both devices. Bluetooth settings can generally
    be found in the Quick Settings menu, accessed by swiping down from
    the top of your screen.
2.  On the Bluetooth settings screen, tap Pair new device and wait for
    the list of AVAILABLE DEVICES to populate.
    The screen of both devices should be open and unlocked to appear
    available for syncing.
3.  Once you see the device you would like to share files with and
    confirm its identity, tap on the device name to pair.
4.  Confirm the code and the pair request on both devices.
5.  Locate and select the file you wish to send and tap Share. Select
    Bluetooth in the share options and tap the name of the other device
    in the list.

You can also use Android apps for Bluetooth sharing, including SHAREit
or others.

{% hint style=“warning” %} For transferring larger files (bigger than
10MB) such as base map folders, we recommend connecting to a computer
and transferring via cable if possible.
For more on adding base maps to Mapeo Mobile, see
#adding-a-base-map-using-a-computer. {% endhint %}

I want to connect to Wi-Fi

See below for details on how to connect to a WiFi network:

-   Connect to Wi-Fi on a smartphone
-   **** Connect to Wi-Fi on a computer

Connect to Wi-Fi on a smartphone

The details may vary for each smartphone, but Wi-Fi settings can
generally be found in the Quick Settings menu, which can be accessed by
swiping down from the top of your screen.

Tap the toggle to turn on Wi-Fi, then tap the name of the Wi-Fi network
you would like to connect to. Enter the password if required and tap
Connect.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Connect to Wi-Fi on a computer

On Windows

-   Click on the Windows menu button, select Settings, click on Network
    and Internet. In the left menu panel, click on the Wi-Fi option.
    Toggle the Wi-Fi option to On to enable your Wi-Fi adapter. Connect
    to the WiFi network you prefer. You might be asked for the password.
-   A short path is to click on the Wi-Fi icon in the toolbar in the
    lower-left corner of your computer screen. If it isn’t there, click
    the arrow to see if it’s grouped with the other icons on your
    toolbar. Click on the larger Wi-Fi box that appears in the pop-up
    menu and select the WiFi network you want to connect to.

[]

The person I want to sync with has deleted valuable data

As you know, when synchronizing with another Mapeo user, ALL DATA is
shared in both directions. When you sync with someone, you will receive
all of the observations on their phone and they will receive all of your
observations. All edits and deletions that have been made to data will
also be transferred to the other device during sync. For example, if a
person deletes or edits an observation and then syncs with other
devices, this observation will be deleted or edited on all synced
devices.

-   Let’s give a practical example:

It can happen that someone misunderstood the behavior of data syncing
and deleted some of the data they collected in Mapeo Mobile after having
synced with their peers, thinking that data would already be safe in a
central database. This is not how Mapeo works. What will happen is that
the data you delete on your phone, will be deleted from everyone’s
phones after syncing with them.

-   How to prevent the data deleted on one device from being deleted
    from other devices after syncing?

There is a work-around to prevent this, but it can be very
time-consuming. Mapeo sync works under the premise that if multiple
users edit the same observation before syncing with each other, the
changes that will prevail after syncing are the most recent ones.

Knowing this, before syncing with the person that deleted the data, you
can explore your database in Mapeo Desktop, identify the observations
created and deleted by the person that deleted data, and make a small
edit to each of them. After that, sync your Mapeo Desktop device with
the other person’s device. This way, after syncing with the person that
deleted the data, not only will your data will not be deleted, but the
person that deleted the data will get the data back.

Here you have an example of an activity that you can practice with your
team to clarify this behavior:

💡 Activity on syncing hierarchy

This activity shows which edits take priority when synced data has been
edited on multiple devices.

1.  First, you need to have all participants create observations and
    sync with each other.
2.  Once all participants have synced and have the same database, one of
    them deletes one of the observations they created for training
    purposes.
3.  The team verifies that the observation has been deleted and after
    that, the participant syncs with a second participant.
4.  Right after, a third participant that still has the complete
    database, edits the observation that was deleted by the first
    participant.
5.  The team verifies that the observation has been edited and after
    that, the third participant syncs with both the first and the second
    participants.
6.  After that, everyone verifies that the deleted observation reappears
    on their devices with the changes made by the third participant.
7.  Discuss the need or utility of this workaround to avoid losing your
    data when you know you are going to sync with someone that has
    deleted data.

-   How can you prevent this from happening again?

Mapeo sync can be a tricky and complex process and the functioning of
the peer-to-peer database is not always easy to understand. It is
important to create project synchronization protocols to ensure that all
data becomes part of the project database. For more on that, see
creating-user-protocols.md. # I can’t sync with the sync file

Currently, only computers with Mapeo Desktop installed can sync with a
sync file (.mapeodata). If you’re having trouble syncing with a sync
file, explore the various solutions, in this order:

1.  Check that both devices use the same configuration
2.  Check that they use the same version of Mapeo
3.  Make sure the sync file is not corrupted

Check that both devices use the same configuration

To sync with a sync file, the configuration the sync file was created
with must be the same as the configuration used by the device you want
to sync with.

First of all, check that this is the case. To do this, check what
configuration the computer you want to sync with is using, and find out
what configuration the computer that created the sync file uses. You can
check the configuration used in Mapeo Desktop at the bottom of the
Synchronization screen.

If the configuration is not the same, you have two possible options:

Option A: Change the settings on the target computer

On the computer where you want to sync the file, import the
configuration used to create the sync file. For it:

1.  On Mapeo Desktop, on the Top menu bar, click File and select Import
    Configuration.
2.  In the popup window, navigate to the folder on the computer where
    you saved the configuration file (.mapeosettings) that you want to
    import. Click the file, then click Open. You may see a white screen
    for a few seconds while the configuration is changed.
3.  Restart Mapeo Desktop.
4.  Try again to sync with the desired sync file.

[]

Option B: Change settings on the source computer

On the computer where the sync file was created, import the
configuration you’re using on the computer you want to sync with and
recreate the sync file. To do so, follow the next steps:

1.  On Mapeo Desktop, on the Top menu bar, click File and select Import
    Configuration.
2.  In the popup window, navigate to the folder on the computer where
    you saved the configuration file (.mapeosettings) that you want to
    import. Click the file, then click Open. You may see a white screen
    for a few seconds while the configuration is changed.
3.  Restart Mapeo Desktop.
4.  Re-create the sync file, from the Synchronization screen, by
    clicking the Create Sync File button. Do not close or exit the
    Synchronization screen until the process is complete. Closing in the
    middle of the process could create a corrupt sync file.
5.  Share the sync file with the computer you want to sync with. For
    more information on this point, see sharing-files-between-devices.md
6.  On the destination computer, on the Synchronize screen, click
    Synchronize with synchronization file.
7.  Browse the popup window until you find the desired file and click
    Open. Do not close the synchronization screen until you have
    finished the synchronization process. Closing in the middle of the
    process could corrupt data.

Check that they use the same version of Mapeo 

Normally, the use of different versions does not cause problems when
synchronizing, although if the versions are very different from each
other, it can be problematic. If the sync file was created with a
version of Mapeo that is very old or different from the one you use on
the computer you want to sync with, you could have problems. To fix this
problem, follow the steps below:

1.  Make sure the sync file was created using the same version of Mapeo
    that the computer you want to sync with is using. In Mapeo Desktop,
    you can see the version used at the bottom left of the Mapeo modes
    panel.

-   

If they use the same version, skip to the next step.

2. If they are not using the same version, you will need to update Mapeo
on the device that is using the older version. For more information
visit updating-mapeo-desktop.md

Make sure the sync file is not corrupted

There may be a few factors that lead to a corrupt sync file. One of them
could be leaving the synchronization page before the process of creating
a synchronization file has been completed. Another could be that you
have synced the file with a corrupted database. But there could be more
factors.

To address this issue, follow the steps below:

1.  If possible, create a new sync file and try to sync with the
    destination computer again. Do not close the synchronization screen
    until you have finished the process. Closing in the middle of the
    process could create a corrupt sync file.
2.  If it is not possible to create a new sync file again, or if you
    have tried it and it does not work, contact the Digital Democracy
    technical team through our multilingual mapeo-users chat on Discord.

Indicators of corrupted data

To investigate on your own if the sync file is corrupted, you can use
the following clues:

-   If when creating the synchronization file, Mapeo has been frozen for
    many hours, it is likely that you have corrupted data.
-   If when synchronizing with a synchronization file, Mapeo Desktop
    freezes for many hours in the synchronization process, without
    increasing the number of Data or Images, it is likely that the
    synchronization file contains corrupted data.
-   If there are observations with photographs in your Mapeo Desktop or
    Mobile database that you cannot open, it is likely that those
    observations are corrupted.
-   If in your Mapeo Desktop or Mobile database there are observations
    with dates that don’t make any sense (for example, 1970), it is
    likely that those observations are corrupted.

You can try deleting that data and creating a new sync file
(.mapeodata), but we think it’s safer to contact Digital Democracy’s
technical team via our multilingual Discord mapeo-users chat for advice.
# I have sync issues

See the pages below for troubleshooting tips on some common
Synchronization issues:

-   connecting-to-wi-fi.md
-   creating-local-wi-fi-networks
    -   with-a-portable-router.md
    -   with-a-smartphone.md
-   the-device-i-want-to-sync-with-does-not-show-up-on-my-synchronize-screen.md
-   i-get-an-error-when-i-try-to-sync-with-another-device.md
-   i-cant-sync-with-the-sync-file.md
-   the-person-i-want-to-sync-with-has-deleted-valuable-data.md

I get an error when I try to sync with another device

An error message during synchronization between two Mapeo devices can
occur due to several factors. In addition, the messages may be different
depending on the situation. The most common are:

-   Errors with a yellow or red symbol with the message
    "Error sync terminated" or "Error: read ECONNRES...", occur when one
    of the devices has lost Wi-Fi connection or left the Synchronization
    screen during the synchronization process and when the
    synchronization has not been successful.
-   The white screen with the text
    "Something is happening with the Mapeo database" also indicates a
    failed or interrupted synchronization.

​[]​[]​[]​[]​​

Solutions: 

-   Make sure both devices are connected to the same Wi-Fi network.
    Check that the Wi-Fi hotspot is working properly. You can see the
    Wi-Fi signal on the Synchronization screen of Mapeo Desktop. The
    higher the signal quality, the more secure the synchronization
    process will be.
-   Try to sync the devices again. It is very important that you do not
    close the Synchronization screen on any device while the
    synchronization is taking place.
-   If you still have problems, check the status of the database on
    Mapeo Desktop. To do this, click Help on the Mapeo Desktop top menu
    bar and select Database Status.
-   Check that your Mapeo database is not damaged. To learn more, see
    #indicators-of-corrupted-data
-   If the problem is not resolved, please contact the Digital Democracy
    technical team via our multilingual mapeo-users chat on Discordfor
    advice. # The device I want to sync with does not show up on my
    Synchronize screen

If Mapeo is not displaying the device you are trying to sync with on the
Synchronize screen, start by confirming the following:

-   Both devices are connected to the same Wi-Fi network
-   Both devices have the Synchronize screen open
-   Both devices are using the same configuration

Both devices are connected to the same Wi-Fi network

For two devices to sync via Wi-Fi, both need to be connected to the same
Wi-Fi network. This Wi-Fi network does not need to have an internet
connection.

{% hint style=“info” %} For more info on how to connect to Wi-Fi, see
connecting-to-wi-fi.md. {% endhint %}

-   View current Wi-Fi status in Mapeo Mobile
-   View current Wi-Fi status in Mapeo Desktop

View current Wi-Fi status in Mapeo Mobile:

On the Synchronize screen you can view your device’s current Wi-Fi
status. If connected to Wi-Fi, the name of the network will appear on
the left-hand side of the navy blue bar.
If your device is not connected to Wi-Fi, you will see a “No WiFi”
message with a prompt to open your device’s Wi-Fi settings.

View current Wi-Fi status in Mapeo Desktop:

Wi-Fi status for your computer may be displayed at the top of the
Synchronize screen, under the “Available Devices” header.

If you are currently connected, you may see the name of the Wi-Fi
network and the current strength of the signal. (Eg. FIOS 7S5YS
**QUALITY: 70% ** ).

{% hint style=“warning” %} In some cases, Mapeo Desktop will not be able
to access your computer’s Wi-Fi information and no Wi-Fi details will be
displayed on the Synchronize screen. This does not mean that your
computer is not connected.
For more on confirming Wi-Fi status from your computer’s operating
system, see connecting-to-wi-fi.md. {% endhint %}

Both devices have the Synchronize screen open

Mapeo devices will only appear as available to sync if both devices have
the Synchronize screen open. The Synchronize screen should be kept open
until the sync process is complete.

See below for instructions on how to open the Synchronize screen:

-   Open the Synchronize screen in Mapeo Mobile
-   Open the Synchronize screen in Mapeo Desktop

Both devices are using the same configuration

In order for two Mapeo devices to sync, they must be using the same
configuration. A Mapeo device using a different configuration file will
not show up in the list of Available devices on the Synchronize screen.

{% hint style=“info” %} To learn more about configurations, see
custom-configurations. {% endhint %}

See below for instructions on how to confirm which configuration is
currently in use:

-   View current configuration in Mapeo Mobile
-   View current configuration in Mapeo Desktop

View current configuration in Mapeo Mobile:

To confirm which configuration Mapeo Mobile is currently using, tap
Observations list on the home screen, then tap Settings. On the Settings
screen, select Project configuration to view the name and version of the
configuration in use.

{% hint style=“info” %} For more on how to import a new configuration
file into Mapeo Mobile, see importing-configurations.md. {% endhint %}

View current configuration in Mapeo Desktop:

To confirm which configuration Mapeo Mobile is currently using, consult
the white bar at the bottom of the Synchronize screen.

{% hint style=“info” %} For more on how to import a new configuration
file into Mapeo Desktop, see importing-configurations.md. {% endhint %}

Restarting Mapeo

If you have confirmed all of the steps above and the device you are
trying to sync with still does not show up on your Synchronize screen,
try restarting Mapeo on both devices. # I want to create local Wi-Fi
networks

Creating a local Wi-Fi network is especially useful when it comes to
synchronization since Mapeo allows multiple devices to synchronize with
each other without the need for the internet, simply by using a Wi-Fi
network. Here are two ways to create a Wi-Fi network:

-   With a portable router
-   With a smartphone

With a portable router

We recommend using portable wireless routers of the TP-LINK type.

To connect to the router, follow the steps below:

1.  Connect the router to a power source, such as a computer, using the
    USB cable.
2.  Make sure the router is in 3G/4G mode (there is a button on the side
    of the router).
3.  On the phones and/or computers you want to synchronize, search for
    the Wi-Fi network created by the router. The router has a label
    attached to it, with the name of your Wi-Fi network and the
    password.
    SSID indicates the name of the WiFi Network, in this example, it is
    TP-Link_2088
    KEY / PIN indicates the password, in this example, it is 57880457
4.  Enter the password on the cell phones and/or computers you want to
    sync. Now they should be ready to be able to sync Mapeo data.

# With a smartphone

Creating a hotspot, or portable Wi-Fi area from your smartphone, can be
useful when synchronizing. Especially, if you don’t have access to a
Wi-Fi network or a portable router, you can use a third cell phone to
create a hotspot and create a network to which other devices can connect
and sync.

{% hint style=“info” %} You cannot create a hotspot and sync at the same
time, so you will need an extra phone to create the hotspot. {% endhint
%}

To create a hotspot, follow the steps below:

On the cell phone with which you want to create the hotspot 

1.  Turn off Mobile Data on your phone. Details will vary for each
    phone, but Mobile Data settings can usually be found in the Quick
    Settings menu, which can be accessed by swiping down from the top of
    the screen. Click the switch to disable Mobile Data.
2.  On the main screen of your mobile, click on Settings
3.  Click Portable Wi-Fi hotspot and turn it on using the toggle
4.  Click Set up portable Wi-Fi hotspot and edit or review the password
    and hotspot name (SSID). You can view the password by clicking View.

On the phone with which you want to connect to the hotspot

1.  On the main screen of your mobile, click on Settings
2.  Click Wi-Fi. Activate it and check the list of Available networks
3.  If the hotspot network created does not appear, click Refresh
4.  Click on the hotspot network created and enter the password
5.  Click Connect. The connection will start shortly

With this method, you can share your phone’s mobile data with up to 10
devices using a Wi-Fi hotspot.

{% hint style=“warning” %} Important note:
Make sure to turn off Mobile Data on the phone that creates the hotspot.

Your telephone company may charge additional fees for using this
feature.

Some of these steps only work on Android 9 and later versions. {%
endhint %} — description: Common technical issues —

🔧 Troubleshooting

{% hint style=“warning” %} Very important: If you uninstall Mapeo trying
to solve problems, you will lose all data if you have not synchronized
with someone before or you have not created a backup. {% endhint %}

See additional information and troubleshooting steps for some common
technical issues in the pages below:

-   i-cant-start-mapeo.md

-   mapeo-closes-automatically.md

-   i-have-problems-with-the-gps-in-mapeo

    -   gps-is-not-activated-in-mapeo.md
    -   my-gps-signal-is-very-weak.md

-   i-have-problems-with-the-camera-in-mapeo

    -   i-get-a-black-screen-when-using-the-camera.md

-   updating-mapeo-mobile-permissions.md

-   solving-sync-issues

    -   connecting-to-wi-fi.md
    -   creating-local-wi-fi-networks
        -   with-a-portable-router.md
        -   with-a-smartphone.md
    -   the-device-i-want-to-sync-with-does-not-show-up-on-my-synchronize-screen.md
    -   i-get-an-error-when-i-try-to-sync-with-another-device.md
    -   i-cant-sync-with-the-sync-file.md
    -   the-person-i-want-to-sync-with-has-deleted-valuable-data.md

-   sharing-files-between-devices.md

-   saving-and-printing-mapeo-reference-materials.md # I have problems
    with the camera in Mapeo

-   i-get-a-black-screen-when-using-the-camera.md # I get a black screen
    when using the camera

Typically, this is because you have not given Mapeo permission to use
the phone’s camera, or the permissions have expired due to not using
Mapeo for a long period of time. To change this, you have to follow
these steps: updating-mapeo-mobile-permissions.md # I can’t start Mapeo

1.  Make sure you have Mapeo installed on your phone or computer. If you
    are not clear about the steps to install Mapeo, check: ​

-   installing-mapeo-mobile.md
-   installing-mapeo-desktop.md

Once installed, you have to click on the Mapeo icon on your cell phone
(Mapeo Mobile) or on your computer (Mapeo Desktop). If despite this, it
does not work, go to the next point.

2. Reboot your device and try again.

3. Make sure your device has enough free space available.

If none of this works, there are unfortunately few solutions:

a)  You can uninstall Mapeo Mobile from your cell phone, but YOU WILL
    LOSE ALL THE DATA you have collected so far. You will only be able
    to recover them if you have previously synchronized with another
    device.

b)  You can contact Digital Democracy using our multilingual
    mapping-users chat at Discord. # Saving and printing Mapeo reference
    materials

All content in this guide can be saved in PDF format or printed for use
offline.

Save a PDF

To save a PDF, click on the Page actions menu to the right of a page
title and select Export as PDF.

Choose one of the options from the Export as PDF window:

-   Only this page
    Export only the content of the current page
-   This page and it’s subpages
    Export this page and all of its subpages (only available for pages
    with subpages)
-   Entire space
    Export all pages from the Mapeo Materials guide

Click on Export. Once your file is ready to be downloaded, click on
Download to save the file.

{% hint style=“info” %} Please note that when exporting multiple pages,
the export preparation may take several minutes. {% endhint %}

The resulting PDF file will be saved in your Downloads folder by
default.

Print a PDF

Once you have exported a PDF of the desired material, locate the saved
PDF file on your device and double click it to open. Go to File and
select Print. # Mapeo closes automatically

Unfortunately, when this occurs there are few solutions.

a)  You can uninstall Mapeo Mobile from your cell phone, but YOU WILL
    LOSE ALL THE DATA you have collected so far. You will only be able
    to recover them if you have previously synchronized with another
    device.

b)  You can contact Digital Democracy using our multilingual mapeo-users
    chat at Discord. # Updating Mapeo Mobile permissions

If you didn’t allow Mapeo Mobile access to your phone’s camera and GPS
the first time you opened Mapeo, you won’t be able to include pictures
or GPS information in your collected data.

To change that, go to Settings on your device, then click on Apps,
Manage Apps and select Mapeo. Click on App permissions and allow access
to Camera and Location.

# My GPS signal is very weak

Why does this happen? 

Normally, it happens when there is no good communication between the GPS
and the satellite. There may be one or more factors that cause the
problem: problems with low satellite coverage, being indoors or in
places with a lot of vegetation, not having activated the phone’s GPS,
or damage to the device’s hardware and software, among others.

How is it solved? 

To solve this problem, we suggest you explore the different solutions,
in this order:

1.  First of all, make sure that you have GPS enabled on your cell
    phone.
    It will be different on each phone, but GPS or Location services can
    usually be found in the Quick Settings menu, which can be accessed
    by swiping down from the top of the screen. ​​ ​
2.  Confirm that Mapeo Mobile has access to the GPS. The GPS details
    button at the top of the home screen will display a green dot and
    the accuracy of the GPS signal: ​

{% hint style=“info” %} If you turn on GPS on your device while using
Mapeo, you may need to restart Mapeo for the app to recognize that GPS
is turned on and for it to change the state of the GPS details button. ​
{% endhint %}

3.  Confirm that the GPS sensors are enabled. For it:

    1.  Click on GPS Details
    2.  On the GPS Details screen, make sure that in the Sensor Status
        section at the end of each line, it says YES.
    3.  In the event that one or more sensors are not activated or
        enabled, please check the manufacturer’s manual for your device
        to activate it.

-   If you still have a weak GPS signal, try these tips:

Tips to improve the GPS signal: 

-   Locate in clear places or without vegetation.
-   In the field, if you have a bad signal, take the phone out of the
    case (especially useful for CAD phones, rugged phones, etc).
-   Perform a calibration of the GPS sensor. For more information check
    this link.
-   Validate that the date and time of your device are updated. For
    this, follow these steps:
    -   Open the Settings app on your phone.
    -   Click System and then select Date and time.
    -   Click Automatic. If the option is disabled, check that the
        correct date, time, and time zone are selected.
    -   In the event that it fails to update the time and date, turn off
        the Automatic date and time option, then manually change the
        corresponding time and date.
-   Activate the high-precision function in the GPS. For more
    information check this link.

If the GPS signal still does not improve… 

If, despite having tried several solutions, the GPS signal does not
improve, you always have the option of using another phone or GPS device
to identify the GPS data and enter it manually in Mapeo. If the GPS
signal at the time of saving the observation has an accuracy less than ±
10 m, Mapeo will automatically offer you three options. Click MANUAL
COORDS to manually enter the coordinates you want to use.

You can choose which GPS data format you want to use to enter the
coordinates. This is a useful option if you have a GPS or other phone
device with better GPS signal accuracy.

Click Save once you have manually entered the coordinates to return to
the Edit Observation screen.

I have problems with the GPS in Mapeo

Check these links to solve the most common problems with the use of GPS
in Mapeo: ​​ ​

-   gps-is-not-activated-in-mapeo.md
-   my-gps-signal-is-very-weak.md # GPS is not activated in Mapeo

To solve this problem, we suggest you explore the different solutions,
in this order:

1.  First of all, make sure that you have GPS enabled on your cell
    phone. It will be different on each phone, but GPS or Location
    services can usually be found in the Quick Settings menu, which can
    be accessed by swiping down from the top of the screen. ​​
2.  Confirm that Mapeo Mobile has access to the GPS. The GPS details
    button at the top of the home screen will change from red to a green
    dot and the accuracy of the GPS signal

{% hint style=“info” %} If you turn on the GPS on your device while
using Mapeo, you may need to restart Mapeo for the app to recognize that
the GPS is turned on and change the status of the GPS details button. ​
{% endhint %}

3.  If the GPS details button at the top of the home screen remains red
    , make sure you have given Mapeo permission to use your phone’s GPS.
    To learn more, see: updating-mapeo-mobile-permissions.md​

4.  Confirm that the GPS sensors are enabled. For it:

    1.  Click on GPS Details
    2.  On the GPS Details screen, make sure that in the Sensor Status
        section at the end of each line, it says YES.
    3.  In the event that one or more sensors are not activated or
        enabled, please check the manufacturer’s manual for your device
        to activate it. ​​

-   If you have managed to enable GPS in Mapeo but only manage to have a
    very weak signal, please visit my-gps-signal-is-very-weak.md # 💡
    Mapeo trainings

A key piece of a successful Mapeo project is ensuring that participants
have the skills they need in Mapeo and a clear understanding of the
workflows they are expected to perform. It will often be necessary to
run one or more training sessions to cover these aspects.

Training sessions generally take place at the beginning of a Mapeo
project or when a new participant joins a project. Trainings can cover
different types of content, ranging from a general introduction to the
Mapeo tools and main features, to explaining how Mapeo is used in a
specific project and the workflows that need to be followed when
participating in it. In this sense, trainings can be tool-centered, or
context-centered. Sessions can be virtual or in-person, periodical or
punctual. These aspects of format and focus will depend on the details
of each case.

Mapeo is designed with a focus on being easy to use to help communities
spend less time learning technical skills, and reduce their need to have
budget and access to outside trainers to get started using Mapeo. The
aim is to increase user and community autonomy.

Digital Democracy has been delivering many types of information and
training events based on the needs of different groups and communities.
We have documented the content in this section because we believe that
access to good information and training should not be limited to the
relatively small number of training and support requests we are able to
accommodate. With a diversely skilled and motivated team, we hope the
contents shared here will help you deliver a Mapeo training event that
will work well for your community or audience.

Remember that everyone can learn and train Mapeo and all skill levels of
participants can become Mapeo users in some way. Those who can’t read
and write may be an important part of the project and can also learn to
use Mapeo if demonstrations are tailored to engage them (eg. elders
sharing stories, leading walks, etc.). You will find some tips on this
in the subsections that follow.

In the subsections below, you’ll find useful resources and information
on how to plan, prepare and deliver training sessions based on your
goals, participants, training etc.

-   defining-goals-and-format.md
    -   What are the goals of the training?
    -   Who will be involved?
    -   What will be the format of the session(s)?
-   ****structuring-a-training****
    -   best-practices-for-planning-a-training.md
        -   General training tips when planning a training
        -   Tips for engaging with participants with various skill
            levels
        -   Tips for virtual events
    -   structuring-the-agenda-content-and-activities
        -   Suggestions for different sections of a training event
        -   Tips on how to train different important features and
            workflows in Mapeo
        -   Available materials and resources for the training event
-   ****preparing-equipment-and-supplies-for-a-training****
    -   recommended-equipment-and-supplies.md
        -   In-person events
        -   Virtual events
    -   tech-preparation-before-doing-in-person-training.md
        -   Participants devices
        -   Trainer devices
        -   Tech support devices # Structuring a training

In this section, you will find a collection of best practices, tips,
ideas and resources that you can use when planning and conducting a
training event. From tips on how to engage with participants in an
in-person event to recommendations for virtual events, from suggestions
on how to tackle the different sections of the agenda, to tips and
exercises that you can use to practice different Mapeo workflows.
Moreover, we also have compiled a list of useful presentations and other
resources that you can use during the training.

-   best-practices-for-planning-a-training.md
    -   General tips when planning a training
    -   Tips on engaging with participants with various skill levels
    -   Tips for virtual events
-   structuring-the-agenda-content-and-activities
    -   Suggestions for the different sections of a training event
    -   Tips on how to train different important features and workflows
        in Mapeo
    -   Available materials and resources for the training event # Best
        practices for planning a training
-   General tips
-   Tips on engaging with participants with various skill levels
-   Tips for virtual events

General tips

-   Mapeo, like many applications, is best learned in with an emphasis
    on practice, so plan to include hands-on exercises and simulations.
-   Scale event goals and be transparent about expectations. Be
    selective and realistic about what can be covered.
-   Mapeo tools each have a lot of features and possible uses for
    individuals and communities. Having clear priorities will help in
    designing a Mapeo training plan that is relevant to learners. Get
    clear on participants’ goals in order to incorporate these into the
    training plan.

Tips on engaging with participants with various skill levels

-   All skill levels of participants can become Mapeo users in some way.
    Some tasks like collecting data are accessible to new users who are
    comfortable using their devices. Other tasks like setting up
    customizations, data synchronization, and generating data outputs
    may be tasks a user is ready to do after they are comfortable with
    the Mapeo interfaces, and understand what kind of information they
    are working with.
-   If community members who can’t read or write are important to the
    project (eg. elders sharing stories, leading walks, etc.), make sure
    that use demonstrations are tailored to engage them, so that they
    are also able to use Mapeo.
-   It is important to present information and instruction at a
    vocabulary and skill level that is accessible to participants.
-   Newly learned skills can be affirmed by asking participants to share
    with their peers what they were able to do using Mapeo. Even if they
    are unsure, it’s good to remind them that making mistakes or asking
    for help in the learning environment is much better than getting
    stuck when alone.
-   Be mindful of different abilities and disabilities in the group.
    Impaired vision, hearing, dexterity, and mobility, as well as
    diverse levels of literacy and language fluency can impact one’s
    ability to learn new skills and be a confident Mapeo user. Mapeo
    trainers are encouraged to use accessible training techniques and
    support learners with their device’s accessibility feature settings
    and where possible, access specialized equipment.

Tips for virtual events

-   It is always better to use virtual platforms with whom participants
    are already familiar or to separate dedicated training time to train
    them on the use of new platforms.
-   Mapeo, like many applications, is best learned in with an emphasis
    on practice. You can promote this even in virtual events.
-   If you use Zoom, you can use breakout rooms, polls, and other tools
    to make the session more interactive.
-   Make sure to use visual materials to share the content in different
    formats (oral, visual, etc.). You can find some useful visual
    materials in additional-references.md
-   Use screen sharing software and connections to make demonstrations
    of Mapeo on your smartphone and computer
-   Pre-recorded videos of demos are recommended to have on hand in the
    case that live demos are not working well*
    -   Consider that it can be very demanding on your computer’s video
        card to participate in a live video conference while doing a
        screen share and local screen mirroring. This can often affect
        the computer’s capacity to perform well. Also, most software
        will be slower and less responsive in this context and Mapeo is
        no exception.
    -   Any WiFi-based screen mirroring tool will prevent Mapeo from
        being able to use Mapeo’s synchronization via WiFi. It is highly
        recommended to prerecord this on both devices used.
-   We encourage you to sample content that can be seen, recorded or
    captured by attendees. # Suggestions for the different sections of a
    training event

A training activity generally begins with an opening and introduction,
followed by demonstrations and walkthroughs, a practice time, and time
for questions and discussion. When possible, it also can include a
demonstration by the participants. Here you will find some tips for
these different sections:

Opening and Introduction

Take time for making an appropriate and meaningful opening that is
directed by local leaders. Mapeo is a tool designed for communities to
use in their unique contexts. What is shared in the opening can help
participants contextualize the possible application and impact of their
use of Mapeo.

Participatory introductions are an opportunity for the trainer to hear
from participants why they are participating in a Mapeo training. This
becomes a collective affirmation of the effort everyone is giving in
sharing the learning process.

When introducing or reintroducing Mapeo to a group, give concrete
examples from other places about how Mapeo works or helped a community
achieve their goal, followed by goals and expectations about what the
participants will be learning about Mapeo at the current event. Allow
time in this section for questions or concerns to make sure that the
agenda is going to work.

For events that will include hands-on practice with Mapeo, take a moment
to remind participants to charge their devices.

Demonstration

Show a user task or workflow once with everyone watching first.

Be specific when describing what you want to do and what you have to
click/tap to do it. Often describing the shape, color, location, and
when available, a label of a button in a demonstration will make it
easier for participants to recall more options for interacting with
Mapeo.

You can also use some support for the demonstrations, such as using a
slide or a printed demo to show people on, or if you only have one
device, you can walk around so everyone sees it.

Walkthrough

Have all participants’ equipment ready to use and distributed to
participants. (see #participant-devices )

Ask leading questions - I want to do x, Where should I click/tap?

Having a dedicated support person to help participants resolve equipment
issues, and walk around the room to offer support if it’s an in-person
training, is essential for maintaining a flow during instructional time.

Practice

Make use of consistent learning teams. Groups of 3-6 people generally
work best for Mapeo Mobile, groups of 2-3 people work well for Mapeo
Desktop. You will find some ideas for exercises in
tips-and-suggested-activities-for-training-key-features-of-mapeo.md

Practice time is a good moment for you as a trainer to observe the
participants and get a sense of which processes are harder to follow and
where to dive a little deeper.

Facilitating Q&A during a workshop

A lot of questions that come up about Mapeo revolve around design,
possible use cases, and if it has the features needed by the user (check
is-mapeo-right-for-me.md). Depending on the training agenda, your
familiarity with Mapeo, and your access to Mapeo resources, you may be
able to answer these questions when they come up, or document the
questions and return to them at the end or at a different time.

Equipment issues are often the first issues that arise so provide
adequate time to troubleshoot.

You can take a look at thisfaqs.md section, where we gathered some of
the most common questions about Mapeo.

Participant Demonstration

Newly learned skills can be affirmed by asking participants to share
with their peers what they were able to do using Mapeo. Even if they are
unsure, it’s good to remind them that making mistakes or asking for help
in the learning environment is much better than getting stuck when
alone.

Mapeo is designed for community-owned data and so it is important that
users are able to see the data on Mapeo and be able to talk about it in
their own words.

Before finishing the practical part, consider if you want everyone to
delete the data created during the simulation so that it is not mixed
with the project data.

Evaluation of the event

Review what was shared or learned in the session and highlight any
reminders about Mapeo tasks that were particularly difficult for the
participants.

Gather feedback about Mapeo and about how the learning experience went.

This can be tricky depending on the context. So, here are some practices
that have worked for us:

-   Instead of testing/evaluating skills gained, ask questions about
    where participants found pain points with Mapeo, and what could be
    improved. This way you can encourage discussion on the most
    difficult processes in Mapeo.
-   Make questions around the time used to deliver each section
    (e.g. did we invest enough time to practice the synchronization
    between devices?), to identify which are the things that were more
    difficult to follow and require more time and attention in the next
    training session.
-   Ask the participants to compare things. They might not want to say
    that something was bad, but maybe you can come up with a clear
    ranking by asking questions like “what was easier to learn, this
    aspect or that aspect?”
-   Ask how effective the training session has been for them, or how
    useful the Mapeo tool and its processes are to them. This also opens
    a space to discuss where the focus of the training should be next
    time.

Identify any needed follow-up and how that will happen.

Closing a training event

Give that final word to the local leaders that are present. Often during
technical training, local leaders observe and identify obstacles,
behaviors, possibilities, and solutions. They are the best at
articulating the importance of Mapeo in the project and getting specific
about the responsibilities the participants have in maintaining skills
and making the quality of information high. # Structuring the agenda,
content and activities

In this section, we put together a few suggestions on how to plan the
agenda and different sections of a training, and included some tips and
proposed exercises for training some of the key features and workflows
in Mapeo.

-   suggestions-for-the-different-sections-of-a-training-event.md
-   tips-and-suggested-activities-for-training-key-features-of-mapeo.md
-   materials-and-resources-available-for-the-training-event.md # Tips
    and suggested activities for training key features of Mapeo

Different features and workflows of Mapeo differ in terms of complexity,
difficulty, and relative importance depending on your project. In order
to help you plan the training activity, we have put together some
reflections on the most commonly used Mapeo workflows and features, as
well as some ideas for exercises that you can do with your group to
practice the specific workflows during a training activity.

-   Collecting data
    -   💡 Activity 1 - Collect data with Mapeo Mobile
    -   💡 Activity 2 - Create territory data with Mapeo Desktop
-   Synchronizing data
    -   💡 Activity 3 - Sync data with Mapeo Mobile
    -   💡 Activity 4 - Sync data with Mapeo Desktop
-   Viewing and editing data
    -   💡 Activity 5 - Filter observations in Mapeo Desktop
-   Generating outputs and exporting data
    -   💡 Activity 6 - Share observations with Mapeo Mobile

Collecting data

-   Normally it is a quick to learn workflow.
-   It can be time-consuming to get an agreed understanding of the use
    of categories and the level of detail that is needed for the Mapeo
    data. Having dedicated time to discuss this as a group after is
    recommended.

💡 Activity 1 - Collect data with Mapeo Mobile

Platform: Mapeo Mobile

Goal: To get familiar with data collection.

Format: Individual hands-on exercise

Expected time: 10-30 minutes

Description: Participants create observations, include details and
pictures, and practice editing and deleting observations.

Support guide section: creating-observations.md

Steps for each participant:

1.  Create 5 observations, each belonging to a different category. Fill
    in the details for all the observations, and include 1 photo for the
    first one, 2 photos for the second one, and so on.
2.  Create a 6th observation, fill in the details and add a picture.
    This time, delete the picture before saving the observation.
3.  Edit the category of the first observation you created and save the
    edits.
4.  Delete the last observation you created.

💡 Activity 2- Create territory data with Mapeo Desktop

Platform: Mapeo Desktop

Goal: To get familiar with the creation of territory data with Mapeo
Desktop.

Format: Individual hands-on exercise, computer based, internet (or
offline map) dependent

Expected time: 15 minutes - 1 hour - depends how much you get into it!

Description: Participants navigate to an area they know well and then
practice drawing points, lines and areas (polygons) on the map and
classifying them with information.

Support guide section: creating-and-editing-territory-data.md****

Steps:

1.  Navigate to an area on the map that you know well, for example your
    community or the area you live in.
2.  Choose a background online map which has good satellite detail of
    the area (eg. bing) and zoom in so that you can see things close up
    and editing becomes possible.
3.  What can you identify? Can you see any houses, buildings, created
    structures (football pitches/gardens) or natural features
    (mountains/lakes/rivers) that you recognise?
4.  Use the editing tool to create some points on the map of things that
    you know - such as your home or school or an important location. Do
    the same for some line features (paths, roads, rivers, pipelines)
    and some areas (garden, village limits, forested area etc).
5.  Choose categories for each feature you create from the default list,
    and add any details you wish.
6.  When you have created at least 6 features (a mixture of points,
    lines, areas) save your edits.
7.  Then go back and see if you can delete any, and edit the
    information.
8.  Change the background map so that you have a sense of what different
    options you have.

Synchronizing data

-   Synchronizing is the most difficult feature to fully understand
    because it is an offline feature that is not typical for most
    internet-dependent consumer-based technology. Peer-to-peer (P2P) can
    be very abstract to talk about and is more intuitive to understand
    when in action.
-   This functionality has a relatively steep learning curve for new
    users.
-   It is best to do it early in a training agenda in case more time is
    needed or the agenda requires this to be repeated towards the end of
    the event.
-   This is essential for understanding how data is aggregated on phones
    and/or computers with Mapeo when used in a community GIS data
    project.
-   Hands-on exercises are the best way to show and clarify that any
    edits or deletions made in the database on any device, will be shown
    on the other devices after syncing.
-   Having participants practice data sharing and data syncing is useful
    to visually illustrate the different behavior of the data in these
    two processes.
-   This is the most technically demanding module, and it requires
    careful preparation. (See #participant-devices)
-   Pay extra attention to synchronization via Wi-Fi equipment
    requirements (See#synchronizing-via-wi-fi).
-   For Mapeo Desktop, take time to get an agreement on file naming
    conventions.

💡 Activity 3 - Sync data with Mapeo Mobile

Platform: Mapeo Mobile

Goal: To get familiar with data syncing on Mapeo Mobile and understand
how data flows, and the need for having clear protocols around syncing
to make sure data isn’t lost.

Warning: In this exercise, ALL Mapeo data will flow between devices that
sync. If there is Mapeo data on one of the devices that shouldn’t be
shared with other participants, you need to reformulate the exercise.

Format: 2-4 person groups, hands-on exercise & group discussion

Expected time:
Part 1: 10-30 minutes
Part 2: 10-30 minutes

Description: Participants practice syncing with other teammates, and
understand the behavior of synced data.

Support guide section: wifi-sync.md****

Steps:

Part 1:

1.  Divide the group into smaller groups of 2-4 people.
2.  In small groups, participants sync the information they collected
    with each other.
3.  View the data received.
4.  Try to edit the received data.

Part 2:

1.  One participant in each subgroup deletes one of the observations
    they created in the previous activity for training purposes.
2.  A second participant from each group syncs with the participant that
    deleted the observation.
3.  The second participant verifies that the observation has been
    removed from the database after syncing.
4.  The remaining members of the subgroup sync with the two participants
    with the edited database to confirm that changes made will affect
    all devices after syncing.

💡 Activity 4 - Sync data with Mapeo Desktop

Platform: Mapeo Desktop (& Mapeo Mobile if desired)

Goal: To get familiar with data syncing on Mapeo Desktop, and understand
how data flows and the need for having clear protocols around syncing to
make sure data isn’t lost.

Warning: In this exercise, ALL Mapeo data will flow between devices. If
there is Mapeo data in one of the devices that shouldn’t be shared with
the participants, you need to reformulate the exercise.

Format: 2-4 people groups, hands-on exercise & group discussion

Expected time:
Part 1: 10-30 minutes
Part 2: 10-30 minutes

Description: In subgroups, Wi-Fi sync and sync files will be explored.
Discussions around syncing methods, naming conventions, and backup
creation can take place.

Support guide section: synchronizing-data-with-mapeo-desktop.md****

Steps:

Part 1: Wi-Fi sync

1.  Divide the group into smaller groups of 2-4 people.
2.  In small groups, participants sync the information they collected
    with each other. They can sync using both Mapeo Mobile and Mapeo
    Desktop.
3.  View the data received.
4.  Try to edit the received data, and realize that, unlike in Mapeo
    Mobile, they can edit the received observations in Mapeo Desktop.

[For more exercises on data syncing, see 💡 Activity 3]

Part 2: Sync files

1.  Continue in groups of 2-4 people.
2.  In Mapeo Desktop, each subgroup creates a sync file. When saving the
    file, you can have a discussion about naming conventions for sync
    files.
3.  Each subgroup shares the sync file with the other subgroups (e.g. by
    email, or using a USB stick).
4.  In Mapeo Desktop, each subgroup syncs with the received sync files.
5.  View the data received.
6.  Discuss the use of this alternative way of syncing and its utility
    as an option to create backups.

For more on syncing with a file, see synchronizing-with-a-file.md.

Viewing and editing data

-   This is generally a workflow that is quick to learn.
-   It’s a great opportunity to discuss the quality of data.
-   If the training event is more than one day, it is recommended to
    maximize full exploration of filtering possibilities and potentials
    for outputs.

{% hint style=“info” %} If training is just going to be one day, having
sample data collected on a few different days before the event will make
it possible for participants to practice using the filter by date
feature. {% endhint %}

💡 Activity 5 - Filter observations in Mapeo Desktop

Platform: Mapeo Desktop

Goal: To get familiar with all the filtering options offered by Mapeo
Desktop in Observations mode.

Format: Small group hands-on exercise & group discussion

Expected time: 10-30 minutes

Description: In subgroups, participants explore the different filtering
options in Mapeo Desktop to view their data and extract some conclusions
from the existing database.

Support guide section: #filter-observations

Steps:

1.  Divide the group into smaller groups of 2-4 people.
2.  In Mapeo Desktop, each subgroup uses the Filter by date option to
    filter observations collected under relevant periods of time.
3.  In Mapeo Desktop, each subgroup uses the Filter by category option
    to filter observations collected from specific categories - first
    filtering by one category, then filtering by more than one category,
    and finally excluding only one category from the view.
4.  In the bigger group, representatives from each subgroup share the
    experience with the rest of the group.
5.  In the bigger group, begin a discussion on the types of analysis
    that are possible when viewing filtered data.

-   Editing & deleting on Mapeo Mobile is best demonstrated after
    synchronization so that participants can see how editing permissions
    work and understand their responsibility to the community project.

{% hint style=“info” %} Check out the proposed 💡Activities for syncing
edited/deleted data. {% endhint %}

Generating outputs and exporting data

-   Mapeo Mobile and Desktop are designed very differently in terms of
    generating outputs because of typical user contexts. In both cases,
    it is important that there is a clear distinction between generating
    an external data output, and data synchronization.
-   Mapeo Mobile currently only creates one external output - Mobile
    alerts shared via messaging apps - designed for time-sensitive
    information that can help expedite crisis response to an incident.
    This can be quick to learn if the participants are already familiar
    with the use of other involved tools, such as email or Whatsapp.

💡 Activity 6 - Share observations with Mapeo Mobile

Platform: Mapeo Mobile

Goal: To get familiar with external data sharing options on Mapeo Mobile

Format: Individual hands-on exercise

Expected time: 5 - 15 minutes (If the used messaging apps aren’t
installed in the smartphones, plan for a longer time)

Description: Each participant explores the different options to share
selected observations from Mapeo Mobile with other people.

Support guide section: sharing-data-externally.md****

Steps for each participant:

1.  Each participant shares one observation via Whatsapp/Signal to the
    participants’ Whatsapp/Signal group.
2.  Each participant shares one observation with the trainer via email.
3.  You can discuss best practices around sharing observations via
    Mobile alerts.

-   Mapeo Desktop allows the creation of several types of outputs (PDF
    reports, CSV, SMART CSV and GeoJSON files, and web maps). Read more
    about it inexporting-and-sharing-externally.md. You can discuss
    which of these options are a priority to learn for the participants
    considering the goals and needs of the project. Depending on the
    goals, the skills, and the available time, you can also focus on how
    to use the data exports on other platforms such as Google Sheets,
    Excel, SMART, QGIS, ArcGIS, etc. # Materials and resources available
    for the training event

We have prepared a list of resources that can be useful for Mapeo
trainings. Check it out here: additional-references.md. They range from
short illustrative videos giving an overview of Mapeo, to Google sheet
slides that you can adapt for your training activity, and templates for
creating training resources on textiles to use in outdoor training
events under any weather conditions.

Moreover, you can also use the sections and content of this Mapeo
Support Materials site as a menu of possible content and as a support
resource when having questions on specific features and workflows.
Remember that this guide has also a faqs.md section, where the most
common questions are answered, and a troubleshootingsection to help
solve the most frequent Mapeo issues.

Training events can be run by walking through each topic of interest in
the Complete Reference Guide on this site. However, it is not as
engaging as a participatory event, where the trainer fully understands
the topics of interest and tailors activities around them. # Preparing
equipment and supplies for a training

Before a training event, lots of energy and time go into preparing the
equipment and supplies needed for the event and ensuring that the
technical preparation is done in advance. The checklists contained in
this section can be helpful for working through these steps.

-   recommended-equipment-and-supplies.md
    -   In-person events
    -   Virtual events
-   tech-preparation-before-doing-in-person-training.md
    -   Participants devices
    -   Trainer devices
    -   Tech support devices # Recommended equipment and supplies

We have compiled a list of items that are very useful to have when
organizing in-person and virtual events.

In-person events

-   Make sure you don’t run out of power! Some important items are:
    -   Power strips (enough to accommodate participants’ needs)
    -   International voltage and plug adaptors
    -   USB charging hubs
    -   Portable USB chargers
    -   Surge protector
-   Some equipment to practice synchronization via WiFi:
    -   For small groups of 5 or fewer - access to 1-2 routers
    -   For group 6 or more - portable routers, power sources, and
        charging cables.
-   For file transfer, device storage, and troubleshooting, make sure
    you have:
    -   OTG adaptors for troubleshooting (MicroUSB and USB C are common)
    -   External hard drive with space
    -   USB sticks with space
-   For demonstration outdoors or in low-tech spaces you can use:
    -   Tabloid (11”x17”) printouts of Mapeo screen or presentation
        slides and a wall or laundry line to display them. We recommend
        you laminate them to make them more resistant to use and weather
        conditions
    -   You can also use big textile prints - they are easy to carry
        around, can be used rain or shine and you can use Velcro pieces
        to make them more interactive.
    -   A clean dry surface with shelter from rain or sun to stage
        equipment
    -   For Mapeo Desktop training, tables and seating where
        participants can work in pairs
-   For demonstration indoors or in spaces where projection is possible,
    you might need:
    -   Projector and power cable
    -   Projection surface in a shaded or dark area. White walls are
        best. White with fabric backed with black light-blocking fabric
        works well hung properly.
    -   Video cables and adapters
    -   For demonstrations with smartphones, make sure your device has
        video projection capabilities. This is an advanced device
        feature and requires a video signal adaptor
-   Other workshop supplies that are handy:
    -   Notepad and thick marker (for organizing teams and activities)
    -   Masking tape and utility tape
    -   Spare notebooks and pens for participants
    -   If expected, printed guides, protective case folders, and labels

Virtual events

For demonstration in virtual events:

-   Screen sharing software and connections for devices demonstration
-   Sample content that can be seen, recorded, or captured by attendees
-   Pre-recorded videos of demos are recommended to have on hand in the
    case that live demos are not working well.
    -   Consider that it can be very demanding on your computer’s video
        card to participate in a live video conference while doing a
        screen share and local screen mirroring. This can often affect
        the computer’s capacity to perform well. Also, most software
        will be slower and less responsive in this context and Mapeo is
        no exception.
    -   Any WiFi-based screen mirroring tool will prevent Mapeo from
        being able to use Mapeo’s synchronization via WiFi. It is highly
        recommended to prerecord a demo of this process on both devices
        used. # Tech preparation before doing in-person training

To minimize the risk of unexpected tech issues spoiling your agenda and
consuming valuable training time, make sure to prepare all the devices
involved in a training event.

Here there is a checklist to review before the event:

Participant devices

Ensure that:

-   ☐ The operative system is updated
-   ☐ The correct language is set up on phone and within Mapeo
-   ☐ The device passwords are known
-   ☐ The device is fully charged
-   ☐ You have added the needed files to the device’s memory (Mm: SD or
    Internal memory, Md: USB)
    -   ☐ Create a folder with needed files and guides. (i.e Mapeo for
        Community [Name])
    -   ☐ The most important Mapeo files needed for training are the
        latest installation files (they can have different formats, such
        as .apk, .exe, . dmg, etc.)
    -   ☐ If a customized configuration and maps are being used in the
        Mapeo project, include that in a clearly labeled subfolder (.i.e
        Mapeo Configuration or Community x Configuration)

Trainer devices

On top of the checklist for “participant devices”, make sure of the
following:

-   ☐ Presentation files in dynamic and static formats are loaded on
    your device.

Tech support devices

{% hint style=“info” %} Coming soon {% endhint %} # Defining goals and
format

Training plans are naturally unique for every participant group, and
Mapeo training sessions can go in many different directions depending on
the trainer’s strengths and participants’ needs. Working through the
questions below can be a good first step in defining your training plan.

What are the goals of the session?

The goals of a Mapeo training often fall under one the umbrellas below,
but of course your goals will vary depending on your team’s priorities
and needs:

-   Tool-centered: Provide a general overview of the Mapeo tools or
    focus on specific Mapeo features. For example, training on how to
    collect observations, or on how to synchronize Mapeo Mobile with
    Mapeo Desktop
-   Context-centered: Train on the workflow and concrete tasks that
    users are expected to perform in a specific context or project. For
    example, training to the monitors on the workflow they are expected
    to carry out (e.g. collect observations with Mapeo in the case of X
    or X, send an alert to X person via the X app, sync with X person,
    etc.)

Who will be involved?

When planning a training session, it’s important to know who the
participants will be and what their interests, needs, and skills are.
Mapeo can be used by participants of all skill levels if training
sessions are tailored appropriately. You can find tips on this on
#tips-on-engaging-with-participants-with-various-skill-levels.

Participants’ goals are also important to get clear on. With good
communication, the participants’ realistic goals become the goals for a
Mapeo trainer and are incorporated into the training plan.

It is the responsibility of the trainer to design and adapt sessions
based on the participants, to ensure they are able to gain the skills
and confidence needed to accomplish the necessary tasks in a mapping or
monitoring project.

What will be the format of the training?

Mapeo training events can be in-person or virtual. Each has its benefits
and limitations, which must be considered when deciding the goals,
participants, and scope of the activity. For example, virtual events
allow participants to join from anywhere with an internet connection,
while in-person training sessions allow for better hands-on
demonstrations and exercises with participants.

-   IN-PERSON training event
    -   Strengths

        -   Mapeo is an offline-first tool that makes it possible for
            people in remote areas with limited or no internet to
            collect and exchange data, and these offline workflows are
            much better trained in person in the same context.
        -   A safe, friendly, and relaxed space with ample opportunity
            for peer learning can be easier to foster in person than in
            virtual contexts.
        -   It is much easier for a trainer to observe participants in
            person in order read the room, identify which aspects are
            harder to learn, and change plans if needed.

    -   Weaknesses

        -   Normally it is more expensive, as it has to gather people
            from different places.
        -   Depending on the context, it might be impossible to do this
            given time or logistics required, or because of location of
            the trainer, etc.
-   VIRTUAL training event
    -   Strengths
        -   It allows the involvement of participants located in
            distinct areas.
        -   It tends to be cheaper than organizing an in-person
            training.
    -   Weaknesses
        -   Virtual training events have the challenge of requiring that
            participants have knowledge of virtual learning platforms.
            If you end up organizing a virtual session, remember that it
            is always better to use the virtual platforms that are
            already known by the participants or to separate dedicated
            training time to train them on the use of these new
            platforms.
        -   It is more difficult to read the room and have a sense of
            how people are following the session.
        -   The Internet signal can be weak in some areas, so expect
            sudden losses of connection by participants joining from
            rural areas.
        -   It can be more challenging to maintain momentum, have people
            work together, and remain focused. Participants’ ability to
            remain focused on a computer screen for training is likely
            less than in a face-face meeting. # Overview of Mapeo
            Desktop Territory mode screen

[]

(Clockwise rotation from left to right):

-   On the Mapeo modes panel, you can select the mode of Mapeo Desktop
    that you want to access. Here, the Territory mode is highlighted.

-   The Point, Line, and Area buttons are for creating data and will be
    available when you are sufficiently zoomed in for editing.

-   To edit, you must zoom into the area where you want to create data.

-   Use the Undo and Redo buttons to go back or forward a step.

-   Save your edits.

-   Export territory data to a .GeoJSON file.

-   + Zoom in or + Zoom out on the map.

-   Use the Background map window to select background map layers.

-   The Map Data window can be used to turn map layers on and off on the
    map.

-   The Issues window shows you if any of your current features being
    edited have any issues, such as a missing category.

-   Click Bug report if you are online and want to report a bug on
    Github.

-   The spatial coordinates at the location of the cursor / mouse.

-   The background map might be an online or offline map, depending on
    your set-up and configuration.

-   When you are editing data, the list of categories or details of your
    data will appear here.

-   Details of the version of Mapeo which you are using. # Glossary &
    quick reference sheets

-   Glossary of Mapeo related terms

-   Overview of Mapeo Desktop Territory mode screen # Glossary of Mapeo
    related terms

-   APK

-   Application (app)

-   Background map

-   Background map package

-   Bluetooth

-   Bug

-   Category

-   Compressed file (.zip)

-   Configuration

-   Coordinates

-   Crowdin

-   Data

-   Device accessibility feature settings

-   Feature

-   File extension

-   Folder/Directory

-   GPS

-   Keyboard

-   Observation

-   Offline

-   Online

-   Peer-to-peer

-   Play Store

-   Portable battery

-   Project key

-   Router

-   Synchronization

-   Sync file

-   USB drive

-   Virus

-   Wi-Fi network

APK 

APK files, also called here “Installation files (.apk)”, have a .apk
extensionand can be used by Android phones to distribute and install
mobile apps. For example, you can download the Mapeo Mobile APK file to
install Mapeo on Android smartphones offline. Learn more about it in
#install-from-apk-file

Application (app) 

An app is a type of software that can be installed and used on a
computer, a smartphone, or on another electronic device and has been
designed for a specific function. For example, Mapeo Mobile is an app
for Android smartphones and Mapeo Desktop is an app for computers. Both
have been designed for and with earth-defenders to map and monitor their
lands. Some very famous apps that have been designed for communication
purposes are Whatsapp, TikTok, and Zoom.

Background map 

In a Mapeo project, they are the maps used in the background of the home
screen. In Mapeo Mobile, background maps are used to show users their
current location and that of the collected data. In Mapeo Desktop, they
are used as a background in the map screen for displaying data
collected, created, or imported to Mapeo. Background maps can be
customized (see more about it in custom-base-maps) and usually, they
include geographic elements such as rivers and mountains, as well as
some political and urban elements such as borders, cities, roads, and
others.

Background map package 

A Mapeo background map package consists of several folders and files
that, used at the same time, create a background map. They are often
shared as a compressed file(.zip).

Bluetooth 

It is a wireless technology used for exchanging databetween devices over
short distances (less than 10 meters) using radio waves. Currently, most
smartphones and computers offer this option, but you might need to
activate the **** Bluetooth in your device before sharing or receiving
data. Bluetooth can be a useful way to exchange files in
offlineconditions. For example, even with an internet connection, you
can share a Mapeo configurationfile (.mapeosettings) via Bluetooth with
other devices.

Bug

In this context, a bug is an error or flaw in the software that causes
it to produce an unexpected result, or to behave in unintended ways. We
call “debugging” the process of finding and correcting bugs. Mapeo is
under development and it may have some bugs that need to be fixed. If
you ever encounter unexpected or incorrect behaviors, you can share them
with us via Discordor Github, so that we can debug them.

Category

In a Mapeo project, categories are the different groups or classes in
which you can classify the datacollected or created using Mapeo. For
example, when you create a new point on the map, you can choose among
categories such as “house”, “tree”, “hunting site” and many others to
classify it. Each category is represented by a different icon and has
different questions attached to it. By default, Mapeo comes with a set
of categories, but they can be customized. For more information on
customization, see custom-configurations.

Compressed file (.zip)

Compressed or zipped files and folders are commonly used because they
take up less storage space than uncompressed files and can be
transferred to other computers more quickly. They often have an .zip
extension(they can sometimes have an .7z or .rar extension as well) and
can be easily created and unzipped. In Mapeo, we use compressed folders
to share background map packages, since they are composed of many files,
and it is easier to share them as a folder.

Configuration

In Mapeo, the configuration of a project determines which categories,
icons, and questions users see when they are collecting data. For each
data point collected with Mapeo, users can select a category to classify
the point and may answer questions or respond to prompts to provide more
detail about what is being documented. When you install Mapeo, it comes
with a default configuration that includes general categories and
questions for territory mapping and monitoring. Mapeo offers the option
to create custom configurations to fit the needs of specific projects.
For more information on customization, see custom-configurations.

Coordinates

[Content coming soon]

Crowdin

It is a platform that helps companies and organizations to translate
their software. We use the Crowdin platform to translate Mapeo into
different languages. It is free to create an account on Crowdin and
anyone can contribute translations to Mapeo for new or existing
languages. For more information, see translating.md

Data

It refers to information in digital form that can be transmitted or
processed. In Mapeo, the word “data” is used for both
observationscollected by Mapeo Mobile (observation data) as well as
lines, points, and polygons created using Mapeo Desktop (territory
data). Data can be organized and stored in databases and be accessed
electronically.

Device Accessibility Feature Settings 

Most phones and computers have an Accessibility settings menu to help
users change the settings of their devices to adapt to their needs. For
example, there are often features for blind or low-vision computer
users, such as Text-to-speech or Enlarged cursors, icons, and text.
There are features for deaf or low-hearing computer users, such as
Closed-captioning to convey audio information into a visual form or Mono
audio, and there are also features for limited-mobility computer users,
such as Keyboard shortcuts.

You can read more about the Accessibility options on a laptop (here) and
on a smartphone (here).

Feature

We use the word features to describe things that appear on the map, such
as rivers, buildings, or points of interest. In Mapeo Desktop -
Territory mode, you can create features in the form of points, lines,
and areas.

File extension

It refers to the letters appearing at the end of a file’s name, after
the dot. It indicates the type of file. Common examples are .doc for
Word documents, and .pdf for PDF files. In a Mapeo project, some files
have very uncommon extensions, such as .mapeosettings for the
configurationsand .mapeodata for sync files.

Folder/Directory

[Content coming soon]

GPS

The GPS acronym stands for “Global Positioning System”, which is a
satellite navigation system that allows determining the ground position
(or coordinates) of an object. When we here talk about a GPS device, we
are referring to a portable tool that allows gathering information on
the user’s current position, allows saving specific locations as points
as well as tracks of the paths traveled. Most smartphones have a GPS
feature that gathers the user’s current position. This feature normally
appears under the names GPS or Location. This is what Mapeo Mobile uses
to gather the coordinates of a point when creating a new observation. In
Mapeo Mobile, the accuracy of the GPS signal received by our smartphone
is shown with a ±number of meters (e.g.), and it refers to the margin of
error of the given coordinates. The bigger the number, the less accurate
the GPS signal is.

Keyboard

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
   Keyboard in Windows (credits: image from finallylearn.com modified by
                            Digital Democracy)

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Keyboard in Windows (credits: image from finallylearn.com modified
  by Digital Democracy)

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
     Keyboard in Mac (credits: image from finallylearn.com modified by
                            Digital Democracy)

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Keyboard in Mac (credits: image from finallylearn.com modified by
  Digital Democracy)

Observation

In a Mapeo project, an observation refers to a point on the map
collected by Mapeo Mobile. It is based on a geographic location (it has
coordinates) and can have associated photos, notes, and other details.

Offline

Not connected to the internet.

Online

Connected to the internet.

Peer-to-peer: 

Also called P2P, it refers to a databaseor network that connects all
different devices participating in a project, such as cell phones or
computers. This is the type of database used by Mapeo and it allows
users to transfer data to other users offline, and also allows several
users with computers or smartphones to all work on the same dataset and
share edits. For more on this, read peer-to-peer-and-mapeo-sync.md

Play Store

Also called Google Play, or Google Play Store, it is the official app
store for Android and Chrome OS devices. There you can browse and
download many applications, including Mapeo Mobile. Some of them are
free, like Mapeo, and others are at a cost. You can access the Play
Store space from any Android and Chrome smartphone by clicking on the
Play Store icon n your device.

Portable battery

It is a form of portable power supply that provides charging for
smartphones, tablets, and other devices. If you plan to use Mapeo and
you won’t have access to a charger and an electrical outlet (e.g. if you
are on a patrol or you are in the woods), it’s good to take a
fully-charged portable battery with you, so that you can recharge your
device if needed.

Project key

In Mapeo, a project key is a random cryptographic string of characters
that prevents unwanted devices from getting access to your dataand
allows you to synchronizedata with your teammates. It offers more
security since synchronization will only happen between Mapeo devices
using the same project key, ergo, participating in the same project.

Router

A router is a device that is designed to receive, analyze, and forward
datapackets between networks. In an offlinecontext, you can use a
portable router to create a Wi-Fi internet-free network to which devices
can be connected and share data with each other. For example, by using a
network created by a portable router, Mapeo allows synchronizingdata
between devices anywhere, without the need for an internet connection,
as long as the devices are connected to the same network.

Synchronization

In a Mapeo project, synchronization is a process in which information is
shared directly between different devices, and each device receives and
shares data. In this non-hierarchical process, all devices that
synchronize end up having the same information, and changes made on one
device will be reflected on the other devices after syncing. To know
more about it, visit peer-to-peer-and-mapeo-sync.md

Sync files

It is a type of file created in Mapeo Desktop that allows the
synchronizationof Mapeo databetween computers. It has an .mapeodata
extension and, similarly to synchronization via Wi-Fi, it uses a two-way
sync method. To learn more about how synchronization works, see Broken
link

USB drive

Also called USB flash drive, is a small datastorage device with an
integrated USB interface. You can connect it easily to most computers,
and many smartphones (you might need an adapter). It is rewritable and
very useful to transfer files from one device to another or to create
backups. For more information on how to transfer data using a USB stick,
visit Sharing files between devices in troubleshooting.

Virus

A computer or smartphone virus, similar to a flu virus, is designed to
spread from device to device and causes problems, often impeding the
proper functioning of a file, a program, an app, or the device itself.

Wi-Fi network

It is a wireless connection that’s shared with multiple devices via a
router. If the router is connected to an internet modem, your Wi-Fi
network would have internet. Otherwise, it would be an offline network.
Even using an offline Wi-Fi network, Mapeo allows you to synchronizedata
with other Mapeo devices connected to the same network.

Introduction

Mapeo is a free, easy-to-use, open source set of tools for collecting and mapping information.

Mapeo was built by Digital Democracy with and for earth defenders to
easily document environmental & human rights information and to collect
data about their land. It was designed to work in entirely offline
environments, is highly customizable, and built on a decentralized
peer-to-peer database that allows communities to own their own data.

[Mapeo used to document illegal activities in Northern Ecuador,
supported by Alianza Ceibo and Amazon Frontlines.]

About this Guide

This site provides an introduction to the Mapeo tools and a collection
of training & technical resources to support Mapeo users.

The site is divided into the following sections:

-   Overview
    Basic information about the Mapeo tools
-   Quick Start Guide
    Instructions for installing and testing Mapeo’s default
    functionality
-   Complete Reference Guide
    A complete collection of resources on planning & implementing
    projects using Mapeo and customization of the tools

Use of this guide

Digital Democracy would like both Mapeo and the Mapeo reference
materials we develop to help communities find ways to support autonomy,
accesibility and collaboration in their projects. We know that people
accessing this online resource will have diverse interests, goals,
needs, and technical literacy. For this reason, there are a variety of
paths to access information and levels of details users may be looking
for. All pages in this guide can also be saved in PDF format and printed
for use offline.

Feel free to make use of these resources under the creative commons
license terms: Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International.

Translation
We strive to make our tools & resources accessible and available to
communities in their local languages. If you’d like to contribute to
translating this guide, please see the section on Translating Mapeo to
learn how to get started.

Open Source Development

Mapeo and all of Digital Democracy’s technical development is open
source. Visit the FOR DEVELOPERS section for more information.

Mapeo is a project of Digital Democracy, a non-profit organization that
partners with earth defenders to co-develop technology for social
justice. For more information on Digital Democracy, and how to support
our user-centered co-development process visit our website. # About
Mapeo

Mapeo is a free, easy-to-use set of tools for collecting and mapping information.

Mapeo was co-designed and developed with Indigenous communities who face
threats to their land such as illegal gold mining, oil contamination and
poaching. It was built to support frontline groups to document these
activities in order to take community action against them, report key
information to authorities, file lawsuits, launch media campaigns, or
create maps for land claims. To learn more about how Mapeo is currently
being used, see how-mapeo-is-being-used.md.

Mapeo is open source software that benefits from continued feedback from
our users across the world.

Key features of Mapeo

-   Simple to use and learn
    ****Even if you have never used a smartphone phone before, you can
    learn to collect data, GPS points and photos with Mapeo Mobile in a
    few hours. Mapeo Desktop does require some computer skills, but has
    a simple interface with a limited number of features. For more
    complex analysis or mapping work you can export your data to other
    tools. The simplicity of the tools helps support wide community
    involvement and ownership of projects.

-   Works in completely offline environments
    All data collected or created with Mapeo is stored directly on your
    device in Mapeo’s embedded database, without the need for an
    internet connection or centralized server. Users of Mapeo Mobile and
    Desktop can synchronize or exchange data over a local Wi-Fi network.
    The data never leaves your local Wi-Fi network and does not require
    an internet connection. Mapeo Desktop can also exchange information
    via a file using a USB drive.

-   Uses a peer-to-peer database
    All the data you collect using Mapeo is stored locally on your
    device, not on a server or on the internet. When you synchronize
    with other Mapeo users in your project, you each get a copy of the
    data that each person has collected, so every device ends up with a
    complete copy of all the data in the project.

-   Highly customizable
    You can customize the language, maps and information you collect.
    You can add detailed offline maps of your area, and change the icons
    and questions used for data collection. Mapeo has been translated
    into a number of languages already and anyone can add more.

-   Secure, unfalsifiable data
    All data collected with Mapeo has encrypted logs that can be
    verified for authenticity. Similar to a blockchain, data is secured
    by cryptographic proofs, so you can verify that no record in the log
    has been changed or tampered with. Private projects can be created
    using secure project keys which limit who one can synchronize data
    with. # Peer-to-peer & Mapeo sync

Mapeo’s peer-to-peer database 

Unlike traditional apps where all the data is stored on a central server
(in the cloud or in an office), the Mapeo database is integrated into
the application on your device, and every device (smartphone or
computer) participating in your project can have a copy of all the data.
This is called a peer-to-peer database. We made this choice so that
Mapeo can work entirely offline and does not require the user to set up
any database or machine for storing data.

This peer-to-peer database allows users to transfer data to other users
in the field without internet, and several users with computers or
smartphones can all work on the same dataset and share edits.

Main characteristics:

-   Data ownership and control
    Data collected with Mapeo is stored directly on the devices used for
    data collection and can be shared with other smartphones or
    computers that participate in the same project. This way, the
    information does not exist solely on one device. No one else, not
    even us, has access to this data. Mapeo users are the owners of the
    information collected and have total control over it. In other
    words, your data stays in your team, in your community. To learn
    more about the embedded database Mapeo is built on, see the
    #mapeo-core section.

-   Peer-to-peer data sharing
    All devices connected to a peer-to-peer network can have the same
    hierarchical position within the network. Information is shared
    directly between different devices using a synchronization process
    in which each device receives and shares data. Two Mapeo devices can
    sync with each other at a time, and devices must be part of the same
    project (ie. using same configuration) to sync with one another. All
    devices that synchronize end up having the same information, and
    changes made on one device will be reflected on the other devices
    after syncing.

-   Offline synchronization
    Through synchronization, users can transfer data to a computer or
    smartphone in the field completely offline, and several users with
    computers and smartphones can all work on the same dataset and share
    edits. Offline synchronization between smartphones and computers is
    currently done via Wi-Fi. You can create a Wi-Fi network in the
    field using a cheap ($25) mobile router or a third device capable of
    serving as an offline hotspot. The Wi-Fi network does not need to
    have to have an internet connection. Mapeo computers can also
    synchronize offline using a generated sync file.

-   Requires a sync protocol
    We strongly encourage having a methodical synchronization protocol
    for devices within your project to guarantee that all data is
    included in the shared database and no data is lost along the way.
    For all the information collected in a project to be present on the
    different devices, it is essential to plan how, when, and where the
    synchronization process between devices will occur. This is
    especially important in projects where participants work in distant
    places and do not coincide with other members of their team on a
    regular basis.

-   Data back-up
    By synchronizing systematically and on a regular basis with other
    devices, you ensure that there is a back-up copy of all data. If a
    device in your project is lost, you can synchronize a new device
    with another device in the project to restore the data. Any data
    that has not been synchronized with other devices will not have a
    backup.
    # How Mapeo is being used

Mapeo is currently being used by a variety of communities around the
globe to support territory mapping and monitoring efforts. Below are a
few examples. For more detailed case studies, partner stories and
information about other tool for mapping and monitoring, check out our
Earth Defenders Toolkit website.

Environmental Monitoring in Peru

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Community monitors from Puerto Luz, Madre de Dios learn to use Mapeo to
   document unregulated gold mining encroaching on their community. June
                                   2019

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Community monitors from Puerto Luz, Madre de Dios learn to use Mapeo
  to document unregulated gold mining encroaching on their community.
  June 2019

  Indigenous Community monitors working within ECA Amarakaeri in South
  East Peru are using Mapeo Mobile and Desktop as part of a
  co-management program of a Reserved area. Together with park rangers,
  they collect data on illegal gold mining and other impacts to the
  Reserve and use these for internal decision making and action as well
  as sharing with the authorities for any illegalities to be addressed.

Territory Mapping in Kenya

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
    Ogiek Indigenous People of Mount Elgon learning to use Mapeo to map
   their land. Credit: Chepkitale Indigenous Peoples Development Project

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Ogiek Indigenous People of Mount Elgon learning to use Mapeo to map
  their land. Credit: Chepkitale Indigenous Peoples Development Project

  The Ogiek Indigenous People of Mount Elgon are using Mapeo Mobile and
  Desktop to map important sites on their lands as part of a historical
  land claim.

Ancestral Mapping in Ecuador

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
   The Siekopai in Northern Ecuador using Mapeo to gather knowledge from
    elders before mapping their ancestral lands in Lagarto Cocha (with
                   Alianza Ceibo and Amazon Frontlines).

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

  : The Siekopai in Northern Ecuador using Mapeo to gather knowledge
  from elders before mapping their ancestral lands in Lagarto Cocha
  (with Alianza Ceibo and Amazon Frontlines).

  The Siekopai people of Northern Ecuador used Mapeo Desktop in their
  villages to explore satellite imagery of their ancestral lands with
  the elders, and document stories associated with lakes and old
  settlements. Watch video.

Disaster-Risk Management for Climate-Vulnerable Populations in Thailand

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
    Mapeo users in Krabi. Photo by Raks Thai Foundation, Krabi Office,
                            under CC BY-SA 4.0.

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Mapeo users in Krabi. Photo by Raks Thai Foundation, Krabi Office,
  under CC BY-SA 4.0.

  Village health volunteers in coastal Thailand are using Mapeo to
  collect data on vulnerable people, to ensure they can receive
  immediate and targeted help in case of natural disaster.

Mapeo tools

Mapeo is a set of digital tools, designed to support collaborative data
collection and mapping in offline environments.

There are two highly-customizable Mapeo apps that can be used together
or individually, depending on your goals:

-   ****Mapeo Mobile****
-   ****Mapeo Desktop****

Mapeo Mobile and Desktop are built on top of **** Mapeo Core, an
embedded peer-to-peer database that allows users to own their own data,
directly on their devices, without the need for an internet connection
or to share information with a centralized server.

Mapeo Mobile

Mapeo Mobile is a smartphone application (currently for Android only)
that allows you to collect and map information. Using your phone’s GPS,
you can mark points on a map for your current location and add photos,
notes and other details about what is happening. Information can be
shared with collaborators who are using Mapeo, or with external contacts
via email or other messaging apps.

Mapeo Mobile can be translated into local languages, customized to use
offline maps, and tailored to collect specific types of information.

Mapeo Desktop

Mapeo Desktop is a computer application that allows you to aggregate,
view and manage data collected with Mapeo Mobile. Data from Mapeo
Desktop can be shared with collaborators who are using Mapeo or exported
to PDF reports, CSV files, GeoJSON files or published to the web using
Mapeo Webmaps.

Mapeo Desktop also offers a simple interface for adding or creating
territory information for making maps. It provides a basic set of
mapping features that are more accessible to new tech users than other
available geographic information tools, but exporting maps requires
knowledge of other software.

Like Mapeo Mobile, Mapeo Desktop can be translated into local languages,
customized to use offline maps, and tailored to collect specific types
of information.

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
     Left: Mapeo Desktop is being used to view, manage and export data
    collected using Mapeo Mobile. Right: Mapeo Desktop is being used to
                 create and export territory information.

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Left: Mapeo Desktop is being used to view, manage and export data
  collected using Mapeo Mobile. Right: Mapeo Desktop is being used to
  create and export territory information.

Mapeo Core

Mapeo Mobile and Mapeo Desktop are both built on top of Mapeo Core to
securely store the geographic data, details and media created by users.
Mapeo Core is an offline-first, peer-to-peer embedded database that
allows users to own their own data, directly on their devices, without
the need for an internet connection or to share information with a
centralized server.

Mapeo Core is built upon Hypercore, which is an append-only log of
actions (create, edit, delete data). Data is secured by cryptographic
proofs – every record written has a signature that also references the
signature of every previous record/row in the log – so you can never
change or edit anything already written to the log. For more on Mapeo
Core and data integrity, see here.

{% hint style=“info” %} To learn more about additional tools and modules
that support use of Mapeo, see mapeo-repositories.md in the FOR
DEVELOPERS section. {% endhint %} # Is Mapeo right for me?

There are many tools and pieces of software that you could use for
making maps and collecting data. Mapeo was designed to meet the needs of
specific users, who:

-   are collecting data in primarily offline environments
-   often have limited previous experience with technology
-   are working collaboratively on mapping or monitoring projects and
    using shared data sets
-   want ownership over their data and the power to decide if and when
    data is shared with external actors or centralized servers
-   have specific data collection requirements
-   want to view and gather information in their native languages
-   need a tool that is free to use

Mapeo may not be the right tool for all projects. When evaluating
whether Mapeo will be a good choice, we encourage you to try out the
tools (see the Quick Start Guide) and please keep in mind the following:

-   Equipment requirements
    Mapeo Mobile is currently available for Android only. (An iOS
    version is in development for 2022.) Mapeo Desktop works on Windows,
    Mac and Linux machines.
    Mapeo Mobile uses Wi-Fi networks to synchronize data between
    devices. To synchronize data with Mapeo Mobile in offline areas, you
    will need a portable router (this does not require an internet
    connection) or a third device capable of creating a local network
    offline or hotspot.

-   Peer-to-peer architecture
    The Mapeo tools are based on a peer-to-peer database, which means
    there is no centralized server aggregating information collected by
    users. Two devices that are participating in the same Mapeo project
    can synchronize or exchange data at a time.
    Synchronized devices have identical copies of the Mapeo database and
    can serve as backups if a device is lost or damaged. Please note
    that data that has not been synchronized will not have a backup. For
    more details on peer-to-peer architecture and syncing, see
    peer-to-peer-and-mapeo-sync.md.
    It is important to think through in advance how the participating
    users or devices in your project will share information, as there
    are a variety of possible synchronizing patterns. For more on this,
    see creating-user-protocols.md.

-   Customization and required technical skills
    Mapeo comes with out-of-the box options that can be used right away,
    without any customization. To learn more about whether these default
    options will work for your project, see
    will-mapeo-work-out-of-the-box-for-me****
    ****
    ****Mapeo was also built to be highly customizable and allow users
    to adapt its interface to meet the needs of specific projects. Mapeo
    is currently available in many languages and can easily be
    translated into new ones.
    Adapting Mapeo to use custom categories, icons, questions and
    background maps currently requires significant technical knowledge
    and will not be accessible to all users. If you believe
    customization will be necessary for your project, please consult the
    section on customization-options to determine whether your team has
    the required technical skills.

-   Security
    As an offline-first, peer-to-peer set of tools, Mapeo can offer a
    path for data collection and exchange with fewer technological
    vulnerabilities than other available tools.
    However, the use of any technology can introduce new security
    concerns and risks. Before choosing to use Mapeo or other
    alternatives, we strongly encourage reviewing the section on
    security-and-risk-assessment.md.

Alternative tools

If Mapeo doesn’t seem like the right fit for your needs, check out the Toolfinder on our Earth Defenders Toolkitsite to learn more about other tools for territory mapping and monitoring.

description: Frequently asked questions about Mapeo.

FAQs

{% hint style=“info” %} For help with technical issues using Mapeo, see
the troubleshooting section. {% endhint %}

-   Who made Mapeo?
-   Is Mapeo free to use?
-   What kind of data can Mapeo collect?
-   What languages is Mapeo available in?
-   Is Mapeo Mobile available for iOS?
-   Do I need to customize Mapeo to use it?
-   How does Mapeo work offline?
-   Does Mapeo use a Blockchain?
-   Who will have access to my data?
-   Does Mapeo collect information on users?
-   What happens if Mapeo loses financial support? Will my data be
    inaccessible?
-   Can you help me deploy Mapeo?
-   How can I report bugs or problems using Mapeo?

Who made Mapeo?

Mapeo was built by Digital Democracy in close collaboration with
Indigenous partners in the Amazon who are on the front lines of
defending their rights and territories.
Digital Democracy is a non-profit organization that works in solidarity
with marginalized communities to use technology to defend their rights.
For more information on Digital Democracy and our partners, visit our
website.

Is Mapeo free to use?

Yes, all Mapeo tools and features are free to install and use.

What kind of data can Mapeo collect?

With Mapeo Mobile, you can collect geographic points to mark your
current location, and add associated photos, description, and details.
Users assign each point collected to a category. Check out the Mapeo
Mobile Quick Start Guide to see an overview of mobile data collection.

With Mapeo Desktop Territory mode, you can create points, lines and
areas (polygons) on a map and add an associated category, description,
and details.

For more on Mapeo’s default categories and details fields, see
default-configuration.md. To learn about customizing these options, see
custom-configurations.

What languages is Mapeo available in?

Mapeo is currently available in over 8 languages, including:

-   English
-   Spanish
-   Portuguese

Mapeo can be translated into additional languages on Crowdin. For more
information, see translating.md

Is Mapeo Mobile available for iOS?

Mapeo Mobile is currently available for Android only. It is on our
roadmap to release a version for iOS in the future.

Do I need to customize Mapeo to use it?

When you install Mapeo, it comes with default options that can be used
right away, without any customization. To learn more about whether these
options will work for you, see will-mapeo-work-out-of-the-box-for-me

Some projects may require customization of data fields or background
maps in order to best meet the needs of the project or context.
Customization currently requires some technical skills. For more on
customization options and technical requirements, see
customization-options.

How does Mapeo work offline?

Mapeo is built on an embedded peer-to-peer database, so all data
collected with Mapeo is stored directly on your device, with no need for
an internet connection or centralized server. Users of Mapeo Mobile and
Mapeo Desktop can synchronize or exchange data over a local Wi-Fi
network. The data never leaves your local Wi-Fi network and does not
require an internet connection. Mapeo Desktop can also exchange
information via a synchronization file using a USB drive.

For more on how Mapeo stores and synchronizes data, see
peer-to-peer-and-mapeo-sync.md.

Does Mapeo use a Blockchain? 

Mapeo uses secure peer-to-peer technology with a distributed ledger,
which does not include a public blockchain or consensus.

Public blockchains are designed for a scenario where public transactions
must be mediated between participants which are all potentially
malicious. These “trustless” transactions are the key assumption of a
blockchain that distinguishes it from peer-to-peer technology.

Applications like Mapeo assume that data is managed by the community
generating it - and some of that data may never be publicly accessible.
Mapeo’s approach, in contrast, creates a closed group, where data
creators are also data stewards, managing their own data and controlling
who has access. We take security seriously and maintain protections from
third-party attacks such as targeted hacks and surveillance by
third-parties. For users of Mapeo, privacy is critical for protecting
their ancestral knowledge and environmental monitoring information until
it’s ready to be shared with trusted partners.

For more information, read this blog post and this paper from Article 19
about why blockchain is not a recommended tool for human rights and
freedom of expression.

Who will have access to my data?

Mapeo was designed to be an offline-first set of tools that centers data
sovereignty for its users. That means that the data you collect with
Mapeo will only exist on the device it is collected or created with
until you choose to share it with other Mapeo project participants or
external actors. The data you create will never be stored on external
servers or shared with app maintainers or other actors, unless you
choose to send it or enable and use Web sync options through Mapeo.

Does Mapeo collect information on users?

Mapeo collects only basic, anonymized statistics for debugging,
designing and understanding to what extent the applications are being
used.

What happens if Mapeo loses financial support? Will my data be inaccessible? 

Mapeo is built with long-term sustainability as a focus. This goes
beyond financial sustainability - we ensure that no single entity or
technology is responsible for data storage or access.

Mapeo does not lock your data into a particular data format. You can
easily move your data around, and it is kept in its original form. Mapeo
Desktop can export data to SMART, Shapefile, CSV, and GeoJSON. You’ll
never be locked into using Mapeo software. For more on export options,
see exporting-and-sharing-externally.md.

Can you help me deploy Mapeo?

There is a community of active users and maintainers of Mapeo that
participate in our public chat channel on Discord and on our Earth
Defenders Toolkit Forum. We encourage you to consult these spaces for
additional tips and ideas on how people are using Mapeo.

Digital Democracy’s core team is very small and we have limited capacity
to provide direct accompaniment for implementing Mapeo outside of our
existing partnerships. In some cases we are able to offer support. To
read more about the way we work with partners and different levels of
support, see here.

How can I report bugs or problems using Mapeo?

There is community of active users and maintainers of Mapeo that
participate in our public chat channel on Discord. To join the
conversation or seek help on technical issues, you can access the
channel here. # Table of contents

-   Introduction

Overview

-   About Mapeo
    -   Mapeo tools
    -   Peer-to-peer & Mapeo sync
    -   How Mapeo is being used
-   Is Mapeo right for me?
-   FAQs

Quick start guide

-   Getting started
-   Mapeo Mobile
-   Mapeo Desktop

Complete Reference guide

-   Welcome – Introduction
-   🗒 Essentials for a successful Mapeo project
    -   Planning a Mapeo project
        -   What is the project goal?
        -   What outputs do you want?
        -   What information to collect?
            -   Data types within Mapeo
        -   Who should be involved and how?
        -   What are the parameters?
    -   Security & risk assessment
    -   Creating user protocols
-   ✔ Will Mapeo work out-of-the-box for me?
    -   Default configuration
    -   Default background map
-   ⚙ Customization options
    -   Translating Mapeo & default configurations
    -   Custom configurations
        -   Creating custom configurations
            -   Planning configuration & data structure
                -   Categories
                -   Icons
                -   Details fields
            -   Coding configuration
                -   Adding icon files
                    -   Creating and exporting SVG files using Adobe
                        Illustrator
                    -   Creating and exporting SVG files using Inkscape
                -   Creating details fields
                -   Creating categories
                -   Defining geometry defaults
                -   Adding a project key
                -   Adding project name and version
                -   Building configuration file
                    -   Via the command line
                    -   Using GitHub Actions
            -   Testing and iterating
    -   Custom background maps
        -   Creating custom background maps
            -   Generating map files in .mbtiles format for the
                experimental Background Maps feature
-   📱 Mapeo Mobile installation & setup
    -   Installing Mapeo Mobile
    -   Choosing Mapeo Mobile settings
    -   Experiments: Turning on experimental features
        -   Directional Arrow
        -   P2P (peer-to-peer) App Updates
        -   Background Maps
        -   Security
            -   App Passcode
            -   Obscure Passcode
    -   Importing configurations into Mapeo Mobile
    -   Adding custom background maps to Mapeo Mobile
    -   Updating Mapeo Mobile
-   📱 Mapeo Mobile use
    -   Activating GPS and viewing current location
    -   Creating observations
    -   Viewing observations
    -   Editing and deleting observations
    -   Sharing data externally
    -   Syncing data via Wi-Fi
-   💻 Mapeo Desktop installation & setup
    -   Installing Mapeo Desktop
    -   Choosing Mapeo Desktop language
    -   Importing configurations to Mapeo Desktop
    -   Adding custom background maps to Mapeo Desktop
    -   Updating Mapeo Desktop
-   💻 Mapeo Desktop use
    -   Mapeo Desktop for managing Mapeo Mobile data (Observations mode)
        -   Synchronizing data
            -   Synchronizing via Wi-Fi
            -   Synchronizing with a file
        -   Viewing observations
        -   Editing and deleting observations
        -   Exporting data & sharing externally
    -   Mapeo Desktop for creating territory data (Territory mode)
        -   Navigating around the map
        -   Creating and editing territory data
        -   Changing background maps in Territory mode
        -   Importing and using external geospatial data
        -   Exporting and syncing data
    -   Synchronizing data with Mapeo Desktop
-   💡 Mapeo trainings
    -   Defining goals and format
    -   Structuring a training
        -   Best practices for planning a training
        -   Structuring the agenda, content and activities
            -   Suggestions for the different sections of a training
                event
            -   Tips and suggested activities for training key features
                of Mapeo
            -   Materials and resources available for the training event
    -   Preparing equipment and supplies for a training
        -   Recommended equipment and supplies
        -   Tech preparation before doing in-person training
-   🔧 Troubleshooting
    -   I can’t start Mapeo
    -   Mapeo closes automatically
    -   I have problems with the GPS in Mapeo
        -   GPS is not activated in Mapeo
        -   My GPS signal is very weak
    -   I have problems with the camera in Mapeo
        -   I get a black screen when using the camera
    -   I want to update Mapeo Mobile permissions
    -   I have sync issues
        -   I want to connect to Wi-Fi
        -   I want to create local Wi-Fi networks
            -   With a portable router
            -   With a smartphone
        -   The device I want to sync with does not show up on my
            Synchronize screen
        -   I get an error when I try to sync with another device
        -   I can’t sync with the sync file
        -   The person I want to sync with has deleted valuable data
    -   Sharing files between devices
    -   Saving and printing Mapeo reference materials
-   Glossary & quick reference sheets
    -   Glossary of Mapeo related terms
    -   Overview of Mapeo Desktop Territory mode screen

For developers

-   Mapeo architecture overview
-   Mapeo repositories

------------------------------------------------------------------------

-   Support
-   Additional references
-   Digital Democracy website # Support

Technical support

For help with common technical issues, see the troubleshooting section
of this guide. For additional support, please check out the community of
active users and maintainers of Mapeo on our public Discord channel.

If you’re a developer or comfortable using GitHub, you can file an issue
in the corresponding repository here.

Support starting a Mapeo project

In addition to all of the resources compiled in this guide, there is a
community of active users and maintainers of Mapeo that participate in
our public chat channel on Discord and on our Earth Defenders Toolkit
Forum. We encourage you to consult these spaces for additional tips and
ideas on how people are using Mapeo.

Digital Democracy’s core team is very small and we have limited capacity to provide direct accompaniment for implementing Mapeo outside of our existing partnerships. In some cases we are able to offer support. To read more about the way we work with partners and different levels of support, see here.

description: >- Some other guides, references and manuals about
community mapping, monitoring and data collection that could be of use
as you design your project. —

Additional references

About Mapeo

Overview

-   :arrow_forward: MAPEO: An innovative tool for rights defense(6-min
    video) [EN / ES / PT]
-   :arrow_forward: Mapeo: Indigenous-led mapping (1 min-video) [EN]
-   :arrow_forward: The Story of Mapeo (5-min video) [EN]
-   :arrow_forward: Mapeo Preview - Desktop and Mobile (8-min video)
    [EN]
-   :book: Mapeo: Monitor and document the world around you (text, GIFs
    and images) [EN / ES / PT / FR / SW / KHM / TH]
-   🔊 Peer To Peer Mapping and Digital Democracy (40-min podcast) ****
    [EN]

Using Mapeo

-   :arrow_forward: Monitoring with Mapeo (workshop, 45-min video) [EN]
-   :arrow_forward: Customizing configurations for Mapeo (workshop,
    45-min video) [EN]
-   :arrow_forward: Short video tutorials on Mapeo Mobile(ES)

Training on Mapeo

-   👩🏽‍🏫 Full presentation on Mapeo (editable Google sheets) [EN]
    -   👩🏽‍🏫 Mapeo overview - presentation (editable Google sheets) [EN]
    -   👩🏽‍🏫Mapeo Mobile - presentation (editable Google sheets) [EN]
    -   👩🏽‍🏫Mapeo Desktop - presentation (editable Google sheets) [EN]
-   👩🏽‍🏫Animations (GIFs) and videos on Mapeo
-   👩🏽‍🏫Mapeo training tapestry textiles (Textile slides to use in outside
    workshops) [ES]
-   💡Mapeo trainings (section on this site with resources and
    information on how to plan, prepare and deliver training sessions,
    depending on your goals, the participants, the format of training,
    etc.) [EN]

Examples of Mapeo projects

-   :book: ECA-Amarakaeri: Monitoring the Amarakaeri Communal Reserve in
    Peru (case study) [EN / ES]
-   :book: Waorani: Mapping Ancestral Lands in Ecuador (case study) [EN
    / ES]
-   :arrow_forward: MAPEO: herramienta tecnología para la vigilancia y
    control de la Reserva Comunal Amarakaeri (75-min video) [ES]

Other resources

-   :books: Earth Defenders Toolkit (a website that includes multiple
    guides, videos, case studies, etc.) [EN / ES / PT / FR]
-   :arrow_forward: Train the Trainers methodology (30-min video) [EN]
-   :arrow_forward: Train the Trainers methodology - summary(5-min
    video) [EN]

Mapeo architecture overview

{% hint style=“info” %} We are currently redesigning Mapeo’s core
architecture and will relese updated documentation once changes are
complete. {% endhint %}

Behind the scenes of the user interfaces for working with mapping and
monitoring data, you’ll find Mapeo’s core infrastructure. This document
is a work in progress.

[Architecture Diagram September, 2020]

Schema

1.  Observation. Mapeo extends the OpenStreetMap specification to add
    ‘Observations’ – a new data type that is like a node or point, but
    with extra metadata and media.
2.  Field. Called a ‘question’ (ODK) or ‘tag’ (OSM), a Field is how we
    structure metadata about Observations and OSM Elements.
3.  Preset. Called a ‘Category’ in the Mapeo interface, but in code we
    call this a ‘preset.’ This type defines a set of Fields and an Icon.
4.  Filter. An expression that can be applied on the values in one or
    more Field across a set of observations.

Database

KappaDB is one of the fundamental primitives of Mapeo Core that handles
indexing of data that isn’t media (i.e., it does not handle images).
KappaDB is a flexible database for peer-to-peer applications that we
developed in 2018, and is considered stable. If you haven’t yet, go
ahead and try the workshop to familiarize yourself with how it works.

Configuration

Each ‘project’ has a set of configuration files. It is identified by a
project key which is a shared secret amongst all devices. It authorizes
devices to read and write to the database. There is no way at this time
to revoke a configuration from a device remotely.

{% hint style=“info” %} For more on configurations, see
custom-configurations. {% endhint %}

Discovery

Each device announces itself on the local network using MDNS. It
announces itself using a hash of the project key, which is also called a
discovery key. This means that 3rd-party observers will not be able to
discern the project key.

Replication

Replication requires advance knowledge of the project key. Replication
will be refused if a peer’s project key is not the same.

Multifeed is the module that manages replication across multiple Mapeo
devices. It depends upon hypercore, a distributed append-only log.
Hypercore only allows one writer; multifeed syncronizes a set of
hypercores – by a variety of authors – across all devices with the same
project key. This forms the basis for creating a view of a single
dataset that incorporates changes from multiple writers across multiple
feeds.

Media

A project also contains media files which are handled separately from
the multifeed module, which concerns itself primarily with structured
data (e.g., json, protobuf, etc). Media files are replicated using
blob-store-replication-stream. This is a simple module that announces
the list of files available on both sides of a duplex stream, and then
replicates the files that are missing.

Clients can provide filters for which files they want to accept on either end; by default, Mobile to Mobile sync does not send original images, only preview and thumbnail sizes. Original images are always syncronized from Mobile to Desktop.

description: >- Here is an overview of the Mapeo ecosystem, including
various modules and utilities —

Mapeo repositories

Apps

-   mapeo-desktop: Source code for Linux, MacOS, and Windows
-   mapeo-mobile: Source code for Mobile

Configuration

-   mapeo-settings-builder: Build presets and sprites for the Mapeo apps
-   mapeo-migrate: Commandline tool for mapeo migrating databases from
    older formats to the latest.

Modules

-   mapeo-core: Library for creating custom geo data and synchronizing
    via a peer to peer network
-   mapeo-server: Mapping web server for managing observations, media,
    tiles, and various static files.
-   mapeo-settings: Manage settings files for Mapeo
-   iD-mapeo: Fork of OpenStreetMap editor, for offline use with Mapeo
-   mapeo-schema: Data schemas for mapeo data types
-   mapeo-styles: Default styles & tiles for mapeo backgrounds
-   mapeo-openmaptiles: Lightweight map tiles for mapeo-mobile for
    global offline map
-   osm-p2p: High-level p2p OpenStreetMap database for node and the
    browser
-   osm-p2p-server: Peer-to-peer OpenStreetMap API v0.6 Server for
    osm-p2p-db

Demos

-   mapeo-print-preview: Demo of web vector tiles for osm-p2p data.

Documentation

-   mapeo-docs-new: Docs site for Mapeo (mirrored with GitBook)

Use Cases
​
Home Toolkit Mapeo: Monitor and document the world around you

What is Mapeo?

Mapeo was built with and for earth defenders to easily document
environmental and human rights information and to collect data about
their land.

It can be used by individuals or by teams who want to collaborate and
share information, and is particularly good at working in offline and
remote environments. It is simple to use, free and accessible, and can
be customized with local languages and settings.

There is a Mapeo Mobile app, used to gather evidence in the field, to
take photographs or record GPS points of significant places; and there
is a Mapeo Desktop app, used to organize data collected on mobile or
GPS, and to visualize, edit and create reports on which action can be
taken which would be hard to do on a mobile. Both tools can work for
individual or team projects as you can synchronize data between mobile
devices, and from mobile to computer, and computer to computer.

Mapeo was co-designed and developed with Indigenous communities who face
threats to their land such as illegal gold mining, oil contamination and
poaching. It was built to support them to document these activities in
order to take community action against them, to report them to
authorities, file lawsuits, launch media campaigns, or create maps for
land claims.

Mapeo is an open source software that benefits from continued feedback
from our users across the world. The next feature of Mapeo could be
suggested by you!Members of the Sinangoe Land patrol using Mapeo Mobile to map their
ancestral territory (with Alianza Ceibo and Amazon Frontlines)

Why you might want to use Mapeo

There are many tools and pieces of software that you could use for
making maps or documenting information, however after working with earth
defenders for many years, Digital Democracy never found a tool that was
built with the needs and priorities of earth defenders at the forefront,
so we decided to build one in close collaboration with our local
partners.

Other tools may require frequent internet access, which isn’t available
in many remote or marginalized areas; they may depend upon an online or
centralized server which takes data out of your hands and into the
hands/offices of corporations; they might be unnecessarily complicated
for your needs, alienating and disempowering to community members with
less experience with computers, or they might tie you into dependencies
on costly software or external expertise instead of promoting your own
autonomy.Mapeo used to document illegal activities in Northern Ecuador,
supported by Alianza Ceibo and Amazon Frontlines

The Mapeo apps are built to address these points.

1. Simple to use and learn

Mapeo Mobile is designed to be learned easily, even if you haven’t used
smartphones much before. It uses many icons so it can be easy to
understand visually. Mapeo Desktop does require some computer skills,
but has a simple interface with a limited number of features. There are
plenty of other tools you can export your data to from Mapeo if more
complex analysis or mapping work is required. This simplicity helps
support wide community involvement and ownership of projects.A training session in the first version of Mapeo Mobile, with the
Kofan team, Alianza Ceibo and Amazon Frontlines in Sinangoe

2. Mapeo works in completely offline environments

Mapeo Mobile shares information by using WiFi networks between devices.
These could be internet based, but can also be offline networks set up
using simple portable routers that work with a computer or small battery
as a power source. Mapeo Desktop can use these same networks for sharing
data, and can also export data to files that can be shared on USB
sticks.A Siona land monitor uses Mapeo Mobile in the forest, with support
from Alianza Ceibo and Amazon Frontlines

3. Mapeo uses a Peer-to-peer database

This means that there is no centralized source of data, to which all
team members or devices connect. Instead all members of a project who
synchronize with each other get copies of all the data on their mobile
devices - it moves around the project network. The advantage of this is
that data you have collected on Mapeo Mobile stays on your phone, and
you can also see (but not edit) data collected by others on your team.
It is a less hierarchical system of storing data than being stored
externally on a server or online, and means that your community can
maintain total ownership and control over the data if you wish.Siona monitors synchronise the points collected with Mapeo Mobile to
Mapeo Desktop back in their village (with Alianza Ceibo and Amazon
Frontlines)

4 . Mapeo is customizable

Much of the Mapeo app is customizable in terms of language, maps and
information you collect. When you download it, it comes with an offline
map of the world, and a default configuration which you can use
immediately to collect information about threats to land or rights.
Mapeo has been translated into a number of languages already (including
English, Spanish, Portuguese, Thai, Khmer and more) and can be
translated into other languages.[][]

Mapeo can be customized by:

-   Translating the app into your local language using an online tool
    called Crowdin.
-   Creating your own list of things you want to collect information
    about, and design your own associated questionnaires and icons for
    them.
-   Designing an offline map, or maps, with the right type of
    information or detail on them to support your documentation. For
    example you might want a detailed satellite map, or a map with the
    boundaries of mining concessions and land titles, or a map with
    elevation data to help you plan field trips.Mapeo used to document illegal activities in Northern Ecuador,
supported by Alianza Ceibo and Amazon Frontlines

How it works

Mapeo can be used in many different workflows to help you defend your
lands and rights. To give you a sense of how it can be used, here is one
example of a workflow for collecting evidence of rights violations:

Download and install Mapeo

You can use Mapeo with the default configuration it comes with
immediately, or you can set it up with customized configurations and
offline maps relevant to the information you want to collect. This last
step requires more technical knowledge, so you may need support if you
want to customize Mapeo.

Collect data using Mapeo Mobile

Depending upon your needs and work, this might involve trips out to
remote areas, or visiting sites around your village. Mapeo Mobile allows
you to take a GPS point and categorize it, adding written notes and
photographs which are linked to the point and timestamped. For example
you could collect information about oil spills impacting your land, take
photographs as evidence and document when the spills happen. Or you
could use Mapeo to map important sites in your territory such as hunting
areas - documenting who uses them and what animals are found there - or
places with historical or spiritual significance.

Synchronize your data

You can share data with other team members using your phones, or connect
to Mapeo Desktop and pass all your data there.

Edit, Visualize and Analyze

Use Mapeo Desktop to edit and view data you have collected using Mapeo
Mobile. You can filter the data to help visualize what’s happening, and
analyze the information for trends.

Export your data

From Mapeo Desktop you can create simple printed or PDF reports to share
with others; you can also create a file to upload to a simple web map
for online sharing. The data can also be exported as a GeoJSON, CSV or
Shapefile for use in other GIS or data analysis applications. From Mapeo
Mobile you can share single data points and associated photos and notes
with others using email or Whatsapp if there is emergency action needed
or if you don’t have access to Mapeo Desktop.

How to get started

The easiest way to start using Mapeo for mapping or monitoring work is
to download Mapeo Mobile from the Google Play Store and have a go. We
hope it is quite intuitive to use but here is a manual to talk you
through all it does and how to work with it as a team. If you want to
use it alongside Mapeo Desktop, or use the Desktop version on its own
for mapping, you can download Mapeo Desktop from our website and learn
how to use it in this guide. Some things aren’t yet covered in the
guides, so if there are things that aren’t clear, ask our community of
users.

You can also find information here if you’d like to make a bespoke
configuration for Mapeo with your own icons and offline maps and have
the technical skills or support to do so. We would love to hear about
your project, and hope you enjoy Mapeo. Sign up to our Mapeo mailing
list if you want to be kept up to date with news and improvements.The Waroani Mapping team from Alianza Ceibo used Mapeo Desktop to
check details of the map with villagers (with Alianza Ceibo and Amazon
Frontlines)[]Community monitors from Puerto Luz, Madre de Dios learn to
use Mapeo to document unregulated gold mining encroaching on their
community. June 2019

Examples of how Mapeo is used

Environmental Monitoring in Peru

  Indigenous Community monitors working within ECA-RCA in South East
  Peru are using Mapeo Mobile and Desktop as part of a co-management
  program of a Reserved area. Together with park rangers, they collect
  data on illegal gold mining and other impacts to the Reserve and use
  these for internal decision making and action as well as sharing with
  the authorities for any illegalities to be addressed.

Territory Mapping in Kenya

  The Ogiek Indigenous People of Mount Elgon are using Mapeo Mobile and
  Desktop to map important sites on their lands as part of a historical
  land claim.

Ancestral Mapping in Ecuador

  The Siekopai people of Northern Ecuador used Mapeo Desktop in their
  villages to explore satellite imagery of their ancestral lands with
  the elders, and document stories associated with lakes and old
  settlements. Watch video.

Disaster-Risk Management for Climate-Vulnerable Populations in Thailand:

  Village health volunteers in coastal Thailand are using Mapeo to
  collect data on vulnerable people, to ensure they can receive
  immediate and targeted help in case of natural disaster.The Siekopai in Northern Ecuador using Mapeo to gather knowledge from
elders before mapping their ancestral lands in Lagarto Cocha (with
Alianza Ceibo and Amazon Frontlines)

Specs

Software requirements: Mapeo Desktop can be installed on PC, Mac, and
Linux. Mapeo Mobile currently works on Android.

Security: Data collected by Mapeo Mobile is non-falsifiable and
cryptographically signed to prove that it has not been tampered with.
All data, whether created on Mapeo Desktop or Mapeo Mobile has encrypted
logs that can be verified for authenticity. Private projects can be
created using secure project keys which limit who one can synchronize
data with.

Main features: Completely offline functionality. Decentralized data
storage. Custom maps and configurations. Peer-to-peer synchronization.

Languages: Can be translated into any language. Currently available in
Burmese, Dutch, English, French, German, Hindi, Indonesian, Khmer,
Malay, Nepali, Portuguese, Spanish, Swahili, Thai, and Vietnamese.

Media: Possible to add photographs.

Import options: Possible to import GPS tracks and shapefiles to Mapeo
Desktop.

Export options: Mapeo Desktop: PDF or print report, GeoJSON, CSV or
Shapefile export. Mapeo Mobile: single point export to email, Whatsapp
and other mobile sharing apps.

Digital Democracy would like to thank all the Indigenous communities
involved in the development of Mapeo Mobile and Desktop.

Home Community Waorani: Mapping Ancestral Lands in Ecuador

  Over the course of four years we partnered closely with the Waorani
  people of Ecuador to pilot innovative software, Mapeo Desktop, and map
  their ancestral territory. After 4 years of gathering map data the
  Waorani won a decisive and historic victory when they won a legal case
  against the Ecuadorian government and saved half a million acres of
  Amazonian rainforest from oil drilling.

Who are the Waorani and What are they Defending

The Waorani are an Indigenous people living in the headwaters of the
Ecuadorian Amazon. Originally nomadic hunter-gatherers, they started
setting up more permanent villages after being contacted by missionaries
and oil workers from the 1950s onwards.They effectively fought against
different waves of invasion, from the Inca to the Spanish
conquistadores, from rubber tappers to American missionaries and oil
companies. However, since contact, their territories have been greatly
reduced, and their remaining lands are now impacted by logging, oil
extraction, and colonist settlement.

Even as Waorani people increasingly interact with national society and
the monetary economy, they maintain many customary practices and a deep
connection to their territory. Today, most Waorani still depend on their
lands, rivers and forests for most of the resources they need to live,
from hunting and fishing resources, to medicinal plants and materials
for ceremonial items.

The Waorani, whose 6000-strong population now lives in about 50 small
villages, have legally recognized rights to much of their ancestral
territory in a single land title of nearly one million hectares of rich
and megadiverse Amazon rainforest. However the Ecuadorian State retains
rights to subsoil resources, including oil and gas, which it can
concession to private companies to exploit.

How the Mapping Started

There has been oil extraction within Waorani territory since the 1980s,
but the western part, known as the Pastaza region, remains free from oil
platforms. However in 2012 the Ecuadorian State created an oil
concession, Block 22, covering much of this region. At that time a group
of Waorani elders visited other Indigenous territories in Northern
Ecuador and witnessed the devastating and ongoing social, environmental
and health impacts of decades of oil extraction. The elders returned
home and shared their experiences, and their communities determined to
prevent similar contamination from impacting their lives and lands.

As a part of their strategy to prevent drilling in their territory the
Waorani set about  creating “a map full of things that don’t have a
price.” They began working with the support of two local partners:
Alianza Ceibo, an umbrella coordinating group made up of representatives
from four Ecuadorian indigenous peoples, the Kofan, Siekopai, Siona and
Waorani, and Amazon Frontlines, an international, multidisciplinary team
living and working alongside Alianza Ceibo on a variety of programs from
installation of clean water systems to legal defense. A Waorani mapping
team was established, and they reached out to Digital Democracy to ask
for support to design a methodology.

The Development of Mapeo

  The Waorani tested a variety of different mapping tools and
  applications but none were a good fit for their very remote, offline
  environment and collaborative process. Digital Democracy had seen
  similar needs with local partners elsewhere, and had just begun to
  develop a new, more appropriate piece of software: Mapeo. The Waorani
  Mapping project became the main pilot use-case for the development of
  Mapeo, and the team started to use it and contribute to its design in
  2015, using it for four years during the mapping of twenty villages.

The Role of Maps and Mapping in the Waorani Land Defense

The Waorani intended the maps to be a tool to communicate their
relationship to land and territory to others, and to gain support for
their vision. In 2018, this was put to the test when the Ecuadorian
government announced a massive sale of new oil blocks that encompassed
over 7 million acres of rainforest, including Block 22 – the western
part of Waorani territory where the mapping had taken place.

The community decided to launch a legal case against the government to
fight the sale, and Amazon Frontlines and Digital Democracy helped them
publish an online mapstory showcasing their message for the accompanying
campaign. The Waorani map told a different story from that of the
government — one that showed their land to be rich in biodiversity and
steeped in cultural history, and in which every single vibrant acre of
forest in question would be threatened by oil production.

In 2019 the Waorani won the lawsuit when the national court ruled that
the Government had not carried out adequate consultation before creating
the oil blocks, violating the communities’ rights to Free, Prior, and
Informed Consent (FPIC). The oil block was removed and half a million
acres of the Amazon were protected. The case set a major precedent for
Indigenous action within Ecuador and across the globe.

Although the maps themselves were the physical outcome of the mapping
work, and played an important role in the court case, the process of
map-making was equally significant. The process included multiple
workshops at the village level to discuss the mapping and look at
drafts. Over the course of hundreds of miles of footpaths trodden by
elders and young people visiting important sites to share and document
biocultural knowledge, a rich shared awareness and language relating to
territory and the threats to it emerged. This proved critical when the
Waorani started preparing for the court case as there was general
consensus on actions and strategy needed to defend their land for future
generations.

The Waorani Mapping Methods

As of 2020, the Waorani Mapping Team has completed the following process
with 20 out of the 52 Waorani villages.

Elements

People: The most significant ‘ingredient’ by far in the mapping was the
Waorani people themselves: the deep knowledge and love of territory that
they brought to the project and their determination to keep it clean and
healthy for the future. The Mapping Team gained expert technical,
facilitation and training skills, and worked with as wide a group within
each village population as possible to draw territory maps and carry out
trips to map ancestral knowledge with a GPS.

Values: The values underlying the project were critical to its success.
One of the most important of these was that of autonomy, which guided
how the Waorani team started the work in each community, agreeing on all
protocols and discussing the methods and clarifying the communities’
role in the ownership of both the project and the knowledge mapped.
Supporting community autonomy and sovereignty and local data ownership
was also a core value in the development of Mapeo.

Technology:

-   Large sheets of paper, colored marker pens
-   GPS handheld devices (Garmin etrex, various models)
-   Weather-proof notebooks
-   A laptop and backup drives
-   Lightweight, portable projectors so that an entire village could
    watch the map editing in real time
-   GIS and cartography software: Mapeo Desktop, QGIS, Mapbox Studio
-   Design software: Adobe Illustrator

Workshop and Trip Resources

-   Boat, fuel and food supplies
-   Emergency kit: First Aid Kits including snake antivenom; Satellite
    phones
-   Walking kits, rubber boots, rucksacks, waterproofing etc.

[]There is space for all community members, young and old, to
participate in drawing the territory map, as here on a massive floor map
in Akaro.

Methodology in each village

Community Agreements : The Waorani mapping team starts by holding a
preliminary meeting in each village to ensure understanding about the
project and agree upon the conditions and methods of the mapping.

Sketch Mapping: The process begins in a participatory way with paper &
markers. Everyone in the community — men, women, elders, children — is
invited to come and draw maps of their community lands, marking rivers
and streams, hunting and fishing grounds and areas containing important
resources across large sheets of paper. Once the paper mapping is
complete, the community decides which areas and paths to visit on foot,
and makes a plan for the ground truthing based on the paper maps.

[]Here a group of women draw the first map of the spaces and places
significant to them within their community, upon which the walks are
determined and the digital maps are based.

Creating a Mapeo Configuration: With the paper maps as a reference, the
community decides which features are important to document (eg.
waterfalls, hunting grounds etc). A designer works with the Mapping Team
to turn these items into unique symbols that will comprise the legend -
this process is returned to regularly as each village has some new
resource they want to add to the map. The Waorani legend currently
contains over 150 items.

GPS Training and Ground truthing: The paper mapping is followed by walks
in which village elders and knowledge-holders are joined by a team of 
young people from the village, trained in GIS and GPS by the core
Waorani Mapping Team. They visit important areas, track hunting and
other paths to collect stories and GPS points to help digitize the
hand-drawn maps.

Data Entry: Back in the village, the team enters the data from the GPS
and hand-drawn maps into Mapeo Desktop, as well as additional
information and stories. A variety of offline background maps including
satellite images, and analyses showing river basins and elevation, are
used to help locate geographical features. Once the data points are
uploaded, the map is projected onto a wall for the whole community to
see.

Export: The data is exported from Mapeo to a GeoJSON file, and then
uploaded into Mapbox Studio. The Waorani Team worked with Digital
Democracy to create a design template in Mapbox and agree on color
schemes and fonts etc. Maptiles of the area relevant to the community
are exported to Adobe Illustrator, where a legend and titles are added.

Print: The Mapping Team takes draft maps back to each village for
further editing and verification before the final maps are prepared and
printed. Each family is given a copy of the map and a larger version is
printed for communal use.

[]Here a couple in the village of Kenaweno receive their copy of the
community territory map which they contributed to at the end of the
mapping process.[]

Here is a detail from one of the first maps created during the process
with the village of Nemonpare:

Just a few of the over 150 icons the Waorani have created over time:

Further reading:

-   Our Rivers are not Blue: Lessons, Reflections and Challenges from
    Waorani Map Making in the Ecuadorian Amazon , Aliya Ryan. Bulletin
    of the Society of Cartographers (2018)
-   “ Indigenous Cartography & Decolonizing Mapmaking”, Emily Jacobi.
    Digital Democracy(June 24, 2020)
-   Waorani Interactive Map - Amazon Frontlines & Digital Democracy.
-   “‘ Our land is not for sale’: Waorani Resistance in Ecuador”, Emily
    Jacobi. Digital Democracy (May 23, 2018)
-   “ Maps in Court and the Waorani Victory”, Aliya Ryan. Digital
    Democracy(May 26, 2019)
-   “From spears to maps: the case of Waorani resistance in Ecuador for
    the defence of their right to prior consultation”, Margherita Scazza
    and Oswando Nenquimo. International Institute for Environment and
    Development (2021)
-   “Waorani People Win Landmark Legal Victory Against Ecuadorian
    Government”, Amazon Frontlines (April 26, 2019)
-   “Waorani Territorial Mapping” - Opi Nenquimo Magazine of the
    University of Mexico (July 2018)

Kofan Case Study

South America

The Kofan community of Sinangoe was the first community to start piloting Mapeo Mobile in 2018, after being involved in a design workshop the year before. Sinangoe territory is located in the foothills of the Andes in Northern Ecuador, overlapped by the hugely biodiverse Cayambe Coca National park and alongside the rushing river Aguarico and its tributaries. The river is the source of life for the Kofan people, but in 2017 became the site of conflict and potential ecocide when illegal miners started crossing into their territory to prospect for gold, and then in 2018 the Ecuadorian State created mining concessions all the way down the River Aguarico, with large machinery and companies moving in fast.

Sinangoe, a small community of only 200 people, with support from Alianza Ceibo, Amazon Frontlines and Digital Democracy, sprang into action, first creating a local ‘guardia’ team to patrol their territory, collect evidence with GPS, drones and camera traps, and confront and evict the illegal miners. Then in partnership with the State Ombudsman they took the Ecuadorian Government to court for the creation of mining concessions that would put their lives, culture and future at risk without adequate consultation. The Kofan won this case, and the appeal, in landmark rulings in 2018. The community is now using Mapeo to continuously monitor mining and other territorial invasions and to map the important resources and historical sites on their land.

#### The Kofan process

- The community ran a workshop to define all the different resources they wanted to map, such as special plants and historical sites and all the risks and problems they wanted to monitor (gold mining, logging, poaching etc.).
- Digital Democracy helped create a list of all these categories with simple icons for Mapeo Mobile, and an offline map they can use in the field.
- The team goes out on patrols: anything from a day on the river to a 10 day trek to the other side of their land. They take with them android phones with Mapeo, backup battery chargers, GPS and cameras, and they use Mapeo to record points, photos and details of any important territory sites or impacts of illegal activities they encounter.
- The Kofan guardia team has different roles, including those who know how to use the android and GPS devices, those with the traditional knowledge to identify resources and know the history, and those trained in how to deescalate the situation if they meet illegal invaders.
- Back in the village they connect the phones and computer to a local network using a portable mini-router and syncronise the new data in Mapeo Mobile with Mapeo Desktop.
- The team can then use Mapeo Desktop to examine the data, see the walks in context, create reports of any illegal activities, edit the data or export it to geojson for use in another mapping programme.

The Kofan guardia has created a focus for the community around which conversations about land, resources, and their future can happen, and given them back a sense of ownership and autonomy over their territory, after years of being sidelined by the national park authorities. The case they won against the Ecuadorian State also demonstrates the power that indigenous people have when supported with good evidence and connections to legal support and advocacy. Apps such as Mapeo and the evidence it collects can become powerful tools in their hands, but are only effective because of the dedication of the Kofan team, the months spent trekking in the forest, their patience in collecting points under a dense forest canopy and commitment to the process despite threats, government inaction and a legal system in which respect for indigenous rights is the exception not the norm.
